
                                  THE
                           ANDAMAN ISLANDERS

                     A STUDY IN SOCIAL ANTHROPOLOGY
              (ANTHONY WILKIN STUDENTSHIP RESEARCH, 1906)


                                   BY
                           A. R. BROWN, M.A.
             FORMERLY FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE


                               CAMBRIDGE
                        AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS
                                  1922








                                   TO
                        Dr A. C. HADDON, F.R.S.
                                  AND
                       Dr W. H. R. RIVERS, F.R.S.

           TO WHOSE INSTRUCTION AND KIND ENCOURAGEMENT IS DUE
                     WHATEVER VALUE IT MAY POSSESS,
               THIS WORK OF APPRENTICESHIP IS DEDICATED.








PREFACE


This book contains some part of the results of anthropological research
carried out in the Andaman Islands in the years 1906 to 1908, under the
terms of the Anthony Wilkin Studentship in Ethnology of the University
of Cambridge. The funds supplied by the studentship were supplemented
by grants from the Royal Society and from the government of India. In
its original form the monograph was presented as a fellowship thesis at
Trinity College. The work of rewriting it was interrupted by absence
from England and was only completed in 1914. There has since been a
long delay in publication as a result of the war.

The book deals with the social institutions of the tribes of the Great
Andaman. These had previously been studied by Mr E. H. Man to whose
work I have been obliged to make many references in order that my
account may be as complete as possible. I should have preferred to
devote my attention almost exclusively to the natives of the Little
Andaman, about whom very little is known. I found, however, that it was
not possible in the time at my disposal to do any satisfactory work
amongst these people owing to the difficulty of language. The natives
of the Little Andaman know no language but their own, and that is so
little related to the languages of the Great Andaman that even a
thorough knowledge of the latter is of almost no use in an attempt to
learn the former. I spent nearly three months camped with natives of
the Little Andaman, giving most of the time to learning their language.
No one who has not actually made the attempt to learn the language of a
savage people without the help of an interpreter, can form an adequate
idea of the difficulties of the task. At the end of three months I
found that at the same rate of progress it would take me two or three
years to learn to speak the language sufficiently well to begin to
question the natives about their customs and beliefs and understand
their answers. I was therefore regretfully compelled to give up the
idea of making a study of the people of the Little Andaman, and devoted
the remainder of my time to the study of the tribes of the Great
Andaman, particularly those of the North Andaman among whom Mr Man had
not worked. I kept one boy from the Little Andaman with me for some
months in the hope that he would learn sufficient Hindustani to act as
an interpreter and so enable any future investigator to begin work with
the great advantage that I had lacked.

In my work amongst the natives of the Great Andaman I at first made use
of Hindustani, which the younger men and women all speak more or less
imperfectly, and gradually acquired a knowledge of the dialects of the
North Andaman. Towards the end of my stay in the islands I was able to
obtain the services as interpreter of a man of the Akar-Bale tribe who
spoke English well and was of considerable intelligence. He is shown in
the photographs of Plates V and XIII. With his help I was able to do
some work with the Akar-Bale and A-Pučikwar tribes, and I found that
with such an interpreter I was able to obtain much fuller and more
reliable results than I could by using my own knowledge of the native
language supplemented by Hindustani. If I had had his services from the
outset my work would have been much easier and more thorough.

The results of my researches on the physical anthropology of the
Andaman Islanders have not been published. I hoped to be able to obtain
the services of some one more competent in such matters than myself to
assist or direct me in the measurement and study of the collection of
skulls and skeletons that I brought to England and that is now in the
Anthropological Museum at Cambridge. In this I was disappointed, and
absence from England has prevented me from completing my work in this
branch of research.

The languages of the Andaman Islands are chiefly of interest as
affording material for the study of comparative grammar and the
psychology of language. I had hoped to be able to make some use of the
large mass of linguistic material collected by Mr E. H. Man and
arranged by Sir Richard Temple, which the latter was so kind as to
permit me to examine. Mr Man, however, expressed the intention of
publishing that material himself. Therefore, rather than delay longer,
I began the publication of my own linguistic studies in a series of
papers in the journal Anthropos, of which, however, only the first had
appeared when the outbreak of war interrupted them [1]. I cannot say
when the publication of these notes will be resumed.

Chapters V and VI of the present work contain an attempt at an
interpretation of the Andamanese customs and beliefs, which I regard as
the most important and hope will be the most valuable part of the book.
It is some years since they were written and although they have
undergone some revision they now seem to me so inadequately to express
my thought that I could wish to rewrite them entirely. At the time they
were written (1910) they exhibited an attempt to develop a new method
in the interpretation of the institutions of a primitive people. That
method will not perhaps seem so novel now as it would have done then.
However, I hope that the two chapters will still have value as an
example of the method which I believe to be fundamental in the science
that has lately come to be known as social anthropology [2].

Of the many imperfections of the book I am, I think, only too well
aware. It is indeed an apprentice work, for it was through my work in
the Andamans that I really learnt anthropology. However good may be his
preliminary training (and mine under Drs Haddon, Rivers and Duckworth
at Cambridge was, I think, as thorough as possible) it is only by
actually living with and working amongst a primitive people that the
social anthropologist can acquire his real training. Naturally work
done while learning how to do it must necessarily be faulty.

It is very late now to place on record my obligations to the officers
of the settlement of Port Blair, particularly to Colonel Herbert and
Colonel Browning, the successive chief commissioners, for their
kindness and help during my stay in the islands.

To Dr Haddon and Dr Rivers I am obliged for reading the proofs and for
many helpful suggestions.


A. R. BROWN.

University of Cape Town,
January 1922.








CONTENTS


    CHAP.                                                       PAGE
          Introduction                                             1
    I.    The Social Organisation                                 22
    II.   Ceremonial Customs                                      88
    III.  Religious and Magical Beliefs                          136
    IV.   Myths and Legends                                      186
    V.    The Interpretation of Andamanese Customs and Beliefs:
          Ceremonial                                             229
    VI.   The Interpretation of Andamanese Customs and Beliefs:
          Myths and Legends                                      330
    Appendix A. The Technical Culture of the Andaman Islanders   407
    Appendix B. The Spelling of Andamanese Words                 495
    Index                                                        499








LIST OF PLATES AND MAPS


Frontispiece. An Andaman Islander shooting fish with bow and arrow on
the reefs at Port Blair

PLATE
I.       A young man of the North Andaman                To face p.  26
II.      A young married woman                           ,,  ,,  ,,  27
III.     A man of the North Andaman and his son. (The
         man’s height is 1438 mm., 4 feet 8 inches)      ,,  ,,  ,,  28
IV.      A married woman of the Great Andaman wearing
         belts of Pandanus leaf and ornaments of
         Dentalium shell                                 ,,  ,,  ,,  29
V.       A man of the Akar-Bale tribe with South
         Andaman bow and arrows, wearing belt and
         necklace of netting and Dentalium shell.
         (Height 1494 mm., 4 feet 9 inches)              ,,  ,,  ,,  30
VI.      Portion of the village of Moi-lepto,
         Akar-Bale tribe. On the right is an
         unfinished mat of palm leaves for the roof of
         a new hut                                       ,,  ,,  ,,  32
VII.     A hut in the village of Moi-lepto, showing      ,,  ,,  ,,  34
         the mode of construction
VIII.    A village of the Middle Andaman                 ,,  ,,  ,,  36
IX.      Woman decorated with odu clay                   ,,  ,,  ,, 120
X.       Woman decorated with odu clay                   ,,  ,,  ,, 121
XI.      Three men and a young woman decorated with
         odu clay                                        ,,  ,,  ,, 122
XII.     A young man decorated with white clay in
         readiness for a dance                           ,,  ,,  ,, 124
XIII.    A man with a pattern of white clay on his
         face                                            ,,  ,,  ,, 125
XIV.     A woman with her child                          ,,  ,,  ,, 126
XV.      A young married woman, showing pattern
         scarified on body and arms                      ,,  ,,  ,, 127
XVI.     A girl during the ceremony at puberty,
         decorated with strips of Pandanus leaf          ,,  ,,  ,, 128
XVII.    A woman wearing clay on her forehead as a
         sign of mourning                                ,,  ,,  ,, 129
XVIII.   A girl wearing her sister’s skull               ,,  ,,  ,, 132
XIX.     The peace-making dance of the North Andaman     ,,  ,,  ,, 134
Map 1.   South-eastern Asia, showing the present
         distribution of the Negrito Race                ,,  ,,  ,,   6
Map 2.   The Andaman Islands, showing the distribution
         of tribes                                       ,,  ,,  ,,  11






LIST OF FIGURES IN THE TEXT


                                                                PAGE
    Plan of Andamanese Village                                    34

    Fig. 1.  Section of Little Andaman bow, in the middle and
             near the end                                        420
     ,,  2.  Shoulder of Little Andaman bow                      420
     ,,  3.  Bow-string of twisted fibre, Little Andaman         421
     ,,  4.  Diagram showing the method of making the loop
             in the end of the Little Andaman bow-string         421
     ,,  5.  Section of bow from North Sentinel Island           422
     ,,  6.  Section of Jarawa bow                               422
     ,,  7.  Upper end of South Andaman bow                      423
     ,,  8.  Section across the blade of a South Andaman bow     424
     ,,  9.  Loop of bow-string, South Andaman                   425
     ,,  10. Ornament on South Andaman bow                       426
     ,,  11. Section across the blade of a North Andaman bow     427
     ,,  12. North Andaman bow seen from the front               429
     ,,  13. North Andaman bow; A, in the half-strung or
             reversed position; B, in the fully strung
             position                                            429
     ,,  14. Toy bow of the North Andaman                        432
     ,,  15. Section across the middle of four Semang bows       434
     ,,  16. Fish-arrow of the Great Andaman                     437
     ,,  17. Head of pig-arrow, Great Andaman                    437
     ,,  18. Pig-arrow with detachable head, Great Andaman       437
     ,,  19. Method of making the cord of the Great Andaman
             pig-arrow                                           437
     ,,  20. Pig-arrow, Little Andaman                           440
     ,,  21. Head of Jarawa pig-arrow                            440
     ,,  22. Arrow with head of Areca wood, Great Andaman        440
     ,,  23. Harpoon, Great Andaman                              440
     ,,  24. Turtle net, South Andaman                           442
     ,,  25. Knot used in making the North Andaman turtle net    443
     ,,  26. North Andaman fish-gig                              444
     ,,  27. Boar’s tusk, used as a spokeshave                   448
     ,,  28. Adze and knife                                      449
     ,,  29. Method of making bamboo mat, Little Andaman         456
     ,,  30. Diagram showing the technique used in making
             mats of thatch                                      457
     ,,  31. Diagram showing the technique used in Great
             Andaman mats                                        457
     ,,  32 a, 32 b. Pot, tied up for carrying, North
             Andaman                                        459, 460
     ,,  33. Basket for carrying pot, South Andaman              461
     ,,  34. Portion of basket of Little Andaman                 462
     ,,  35. Portion of basket of South Andaman                  464
     ,,  36. Pig’s skull with basket-work, Jarawa                466
     ,,  37. Diagram showing netting needle, and method of
             netting                                             471
     ,,  38. Shape of North Andaman pot                          473
     ,,  39. Shape of South Andaman pot                          474
     ,,  40. Necklaces of mangrove seed-tops, Great Andaman      480
     ,,  41. Diagram showing method of making ornamental cord,
             Little Andaman                                      481
     ,,  42. Designs incised or painted on belts of Pandanus
             leaf, Great Andaman                                 484
     ,,  43. Designs on bamboo necklace from the North Andaman   485
     ,,  44. Transverse section of canoe and outrigger           487
     ,,  45. Showing manner in which the boom is connected
             with the float                                      488
     ,,  46. Paddle                                              489








INTRODUCTION


The Andaman Islands are part of a chain of islands stretching from Cape
Negrais in Burma to Achin Head in Sumatra. This line of islands forms a
single geographical system, as it were a submarine range of mountains,
the highest points rising here and there above the surface of the
ocean. Some 80 miles or so from Cape Negrais lies the first of the
islands in the chain, Preparis Island, between which and the mainland
the sea depth does not exceed 100 fathoms. Southwards of this the
submarine ridge sinks to a depth of about 150 fathoms, rising again to
form the small group of islands known as the Cocos, some 50 miles from
Preparis. Geographically the Cocos may be regarded as part of the
Andaman Group. Landfall Island, the most northerly point of the
Andamans proper, is only distant from them some 30 miles, and the sea
depth between does not exceed 45 fathoms. The Andaman Group itself
consists of the Great and Little Andaman with their outlying islets,
and occupies a distance approximately north and south of about 210
miles. Eighty miles to the south of the Andamans lie the Nicobar
Islands, a scattered archipelago occupying a distance of about 160
miles from north to south. The sea between the Andamans and the
Nicobars is over 700 fathoms deep. Deep sea also divides the Nicobars
from Sumatra, which is about 110 miles distant from the most southerly
point of Great Nicobar.

This line of islands is part of a long fold extending from the eastern
end of the Himalayas, which includes the Arakan Yomah Range of Burma
and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands and finds its continuation in the
islands off the west coast of Sumatra [3].

On the west the Andamans are separated from the coast of Madras, 700
miles distant, by the Sea of Bengal. On the east the Andaman Sea, a
depression with a depth of over 1000 fathoms, separates the Andamans
and Nicobars from the Malay Isthmus and Peninsula. Across the Andaman
Sea, less than 100 miles distant from the Andamans, there runs a line
of volcanic activity, marked by two small islands, Barren Island in
Lat. 12° 15´ N. and Long. 93° 50´ E., and Narkondam in Lat. 13° 26´ N.
and Long. 95° 15´ E. [4]

The Cocos, the Andamans and the Nicobars are now part of the Indian
Empire. The Cocos Islands are occupied by a station for wireless
telegraphy. In the Andaman Islands there is a penal settlement at Port
Blair, to which are sent the criminals of India and Burma. The Nicobars
are treated as one with the Andamans for administrative purposes.

Until the nineteenth century the Cocos Islands were uninhabited. The
Andamans and the Nicobars have for many centuries been inhabited by two
entirely different races. The Andamanese belong to that branch of the
human species known to anthropologists as the Negrito race. They are
short of stature with black skins and frizzy hair. The Nicobarese, on
the other hand, resemble the races of Indo-China and Malaya, and have
brown skins and lank hair, and are of medium stature.

The Andaman Islands consist of the Great Andaman and the Little
Andaman, and a number of smaller islands. The Great Andaman may be
regarded as one island, although it is divided by narrow sea water
creeks into four areas, often spoken of as separate islands and called
North Andaman, Middle Andaman, Baratang and South Andaman. It is a long
narrow stretch of land with a much indented coast, surrounded by many
smaller islands, of which the most important are Interview Island off
the west coast, Ritchie’s Archipelago on the east, Rutland Island at
the extreme south, and the outlying North Sentinel Island. The length
of the Great Andaman with Rutland Island is nearly 160 miles, while the
breadth from sea to sea is nowhere more than 20 miles. The Little
Andaman lies to the south of the Great Andaman, about 30 miles distant
from Rutland Island, from which it is separated by a shallow strait
with a maximum depth of only 21 fathoms. The island is about 26 miles
long from north to south and about 16 miles wide.

Viewed from the sea the islands appear as a series of hills, nowhere of
any great height, covered from sky-line to high-water mark with dense
and lofty forest. The hill-ranges run approximately north and south, in
the same direction as the islands themselves, and attain a greater
elevation on the east than on the west. The highest point of the North
Andaman is Saddle Peak (2402 feet), that of Middle Andaman is Mt
Diavolo (1678 feet), while the South Andaman has the Mt Harriett Range
(1505 feet), and in Rutland Island there is Mt Foord (1422 feet). There
are no streams of any size. The water drains from the hills into tidal
creeks running through mangrove swamps, often many miles in length. The
coast is broken by a number of magnificent harbours. The shores are
fringed with extensive coral reefs, and on these and in the creeks
there is abundance of fish and molluscs.

The islands, save for the clearings of the Penal Settlement, are
covered with dense tropical forest. There are few mammals, the only two
of any size being a species of pig (Sus andamanensis, Blyth) and a
civet-cat (Paradoxurus tytlerii, Tytler). The other mammals are a few
species of rats, a tree-shrew and some species of bats. Of birds there
are many different species, some of them peculiar to the islands. The
reptiles include a considerable number of species of snakes, and a few
species of lizards, of which the most noteworthy is the large Monitor
lizard (Varanus salvator).

The climate is warm and moist, and fairly uniform throughout the year.
The mean temperature for the year at Port Blair is about 86° F. (80° F.
on the wet bulb thermometer). The lowest temperatures are recorded in
January and February, and the highest in March, April, or May. The
average lowest temperature in the South Andaman over a period of seven
years is 66·7° F., the minimum during that period being 63° F. The
average highest temperature in the shade for the same period was 96°
F., the maximum being 97°. The average diurnal variation is 10°.

The average rainfall of seven stations in the Penal Settlement of Port
Blair, for a period of seven years, was 138 inches per annum, the
averages of the different stations varying from 104 to 172 inches. For
the same period the average number of rainy days in the year was 177,
the minimum being 160 and the maximum 196.

The islands are sufficiently far from the Equator to have a single
well-defined rainy season. The greater part of the rain falls during
the south-west monsoon, which lasts from the middle of May to the
middle of November. The north-east monsoon extends over the other six
months of the year, which include the dry and hot seasons.

The average weather can be shown most conveniently by means of a
calendar.


January. Cool; little or no rain; wind N.N.E.; nights sometimes foggy.

February. Cool; little or no rain; wind N.N.E.; very clear; light airs.

March. Hot by day, cool nights; little or no rain; wind N.N.E.; light
airs, occasional haze; the weather gets hotter as the month passes.

April. Very hot; little or no rain; wind variable, off-shore at night
and on-shore by day; calm and hazy.

May. The first half of the month like April; the south-west monsoon
sets in about the 15th; the remainder of the month cooler and with wind
W.S.W.

June.        Fairly cool;  heavy rains;   wind W.S.W.,   squally.

July.      }
           }
August.    }     Do.           do.             do.          do.
           }
September. }

October. Variable wind and weather; generally some calm weather;
waterspouts may occur.

November. During the first half of the month the wind and weather are
very uncertain; a cyclone may occur; after the middle of the month the
north-east monsoon sets in.

December. Fairly cool; not much rain; wind N.N.E.


Many of the violent cyclonic storms that sweep across the Sea of Bengal
seem to form themselves a little to the south of the Andamans. Cyclones
of exceptional violence struck Port Cornwallis in 1844 and Port Blair
in 1864 and 1891.

The aborigines of the Andaman Islands have been in their present home
for a great many centuries. It is not possible to say with any degree
of certainty how or when they first reached the islands. Geological and
other evidence would seem to show that the Andamans were united to the
mainland along the line of the Arakan Fold in later Tertiary times, but
even this is perhaps not quite certain [5]. In any case the period of
past land connection seems to be so remote that it had probably ceased
to exist at the time when the islands were peopled by the ancestors of
the present natives. If the ancestors of the Andamanese reached the
islands at the time of a past land connection, they can only have done
so from the Arakan region of Burma. On the other hand, if they
travelled by sea they must almost certainly have started from the
Burmese coast (Pegu or Arakan). The north-east monsoon would drift them
thence on to the Andamans. It is conceivable that they might have
travelled from Sumatra by way of the Nicobars, but the north-east
monsoon would have opposed their progress in this direction, while the
south-west monsoon would have driven them to the east of the Andamans
[6]. It is hardly possible to imagine them coming from the Malay
Peninsula across the wide stretch of the Andaman Sea. The balance of
probability is in favour of the view that the Andamans were peopled,
either by sea or by land, from the region of Lower Burma.

Of the Negrito race, to which the Andamanese belong, there are two
other branches still in existence. The first of these consists of the
people who may be conveniently spoken of as the Semang, inhabiting the
interior of the Malay Peninsula between 5° and 7° N. Latitude. The
other branch of this primitive race is found in the interior of the
Philippine Islands. From their present distribution it is clear that
the Negritos must at some long past time have wandered over a wide area
in south-eastern Asia. The connection between the Andamanese and the
Semang can only have been either through Sumatra and the Nicobars, or,
more probably, by way of Lower Burma. Communication between the Malay
Peninsula and the Philippine Islands must have been either by way of
Borneo or Celebes, or else by way of Annam and Cochin China. It is
certainly many centuries, and probably many thousands of years, since
the three surviving branches of the race were cut off from all
communication with each other [7].

In the Malay Peninsula and in the Philippines the Negritos have for a
long time been living in contact with other races. They have been
driven back from the coasts and fertile valleys into the less
accessible districts. There is ample evidence that they have adopted
many of the customs of the races around them, and have even adopted to
a great extent the language of their alien neighbours. The original
Negrito culture and language and even perhaps the original physical
type have been modified in these two branches of the race.

In the case of the Andaman Islanders it is possible that they have been
entirely isolated in their island home, and have not been affected by
contact with other races, but have been free to develop their own
culture in adaptation to their own environment. If a hypothesis to this
effect were accepted we should see in the Andamanese the direct
descendants, in physical character, in language, and in culture, of the
original Negrito race. In historical times it is known that the islands
have been avoided by mariners navigating the adjacent seas, owing to
the fact that the natives attacked all strangers who landed or were
wrecked upon their shores. Moreover, the islands offered little
inducement to visitors or settlers. The coconut, which is one of the
mainstays of life in tropical islands, was not found in the Andamans
prior to the first European settlement.

The earliest authentic reference to the Andaman Islands seems to be
that of two Arab travellers dating from A.D. 871. In the eighteenth
century the Abbé Renaudot translated the account of these travels. Of
the Andamans we read, “Au de-là de ces deux Isles on trouve la mer
appellée d’Andeman. Les peuples qui habitent sur la coste, mangent de
la chair humaine, toute cruë. Ils sont noirs, ils ont les cheveux
crespus, le visage et les yeux affreux, les pieds fort grands et
presque longs d’une coudée, et ils vont tout nuds. Ils n’ont point de
barques, et s’ils en avoient ils ne mangeroient pas tous les passants
qu’ils peuvent attraper. Les vaisseaux se trouvant retardez dans leur
route par les vents contraires, sont souvent obligez dans ces mers de
mouiller à la coste où sont ces Barbares pour y faire de l’eau, lors
qu’ils ont consommé celle qu’ils avoient à bord. Ils en attrapent
souvent quelques-uns, mais la pluspart se sauvent [8].”

It would seem that the Chinese and Japanese knew the islands in the
first millenium A.D., and referred to them by the names Yeng-t’o-mang
and Andaban respectively [9]. Marco Polo gives a brief notice of the
islands. “Angaman is a very large island, not governed by a king. The
inhabitants are idolaters, and are a most brutish and savage race,
having heads, eyes, and teeth resembling those of the canine species.
Their dispositions are cruel, and every person, not being of their own
nation, whom they can lay their hands upon, they kill and eat [10].”
Some of Marco Polo’s statements about the Andamans, as that the natives
live on rice and milk, and that they have coconuts, and plantains, are
incorrect. It is evident that all he knew of the islands was derived
from hearsay. The passage quoted is only of importance as showing that
the reputation of the Andamanese was such as to cause them to be feared
and avoided.

A more trustworthy account is that of Master Caesar Frederike, who
passed near the Nicobars in 1566. “From Nicubar to Pegu is, as it were,
a row or chain of an infinite number of islands, of which many are
inhabited with wild people; and they call those islands the Islands of
Andemaon, and they call their people savage or wild, because they eat
one another: also, these islands have war one with another, for they
have small barques, and with them they take one another, and so eat one
another: and if by evil chance any ship be lost on those islands, as
many have been, there is not one man of those ships lost there that
escapeth uneaten or unslain. These people have not any acquaintance
with any other people, neither have they trade with any, but live only
of such fruits as those islands yield [11].”

There are numerous references to the Andamans in the seventeenth and
eighteenth century, and all of them show that the islands were feared
and avoided. During these and the previous centuries wrecks must have
occurred in considerable numbers, and it is probable, from what is now
known of the natives, that the mariners would be immediately slain.
Visits were also paid by ships whose water supply had run out, and by
Malay pirates. There is evidence that boats, either Malay or Chinese,
sometimes visited the islands in search of edible birds’ nests and
trepang. In some cases Andamanese were captured and carried off as
slaves. It is extremely improbable that such visitors ever succeeded in
establishing friendly relations with the islanders.

There is one way in which the life of the Andamanese was affected by
the vessels that visited or were wrecked upon their shores, since it
was by this means that they learnt the use of iron.

It is impossible now to determine the date at which they became
acquainted with the metal. The earliest reference to the subject is in
an account of a visit to the Andamans in 1771, where it is shown that
the natives were at that time aware of the value of iron [12]. Until
the middle of the nineteenth century the only supply of the metal was
from wrecks, of which there have always been a fair number.

Until the end of the eighteenth century there was no attempt made to
open up communication with the Andaman Islands, although the Nicobar
Islands were the scene of several attempts to establish a colony. In
1788, owing to the menace to shipping constituted by the islands and
their inhabitants, the East India Company, under Lord Cornwallis,
commissioned Archibald Blair to start a settlement, convicts being sent
as labourers. The settlement was founded in September, 1789, in the
harbour now known as Port Blair, but then called Port Cornwallis. In
spite of the hostility of the natives the colony seems to have been
successful. In 1792 it was transferred from the first site to the
harbour in the North Andaman now known as Port Cornwallis. The transfer
was made with the idea of creating a naval base, for which the spot
chosen was well adapted. Unfortunately the new site proved to be very
unhealthy, and in 1796 the scheme was abandoned, the convicts were
transferred to Penang, and the settlers returned to India.

During the next sixty years the islands remained unoccupied save by the
aborigines. There were a number of wrecks in different parts of the
islands, and in some cases the crews were slain. In 1839 a geologist,
Dr Helfer, visited the islands in the hope of finding minerals, and was
killed by the natives. In 1844 two transports, the Briton and the
Runnymede, were wrecked in a cyclone on Ritchie’s Archipelago, one of
the ships being thrown high up over a reef into a mangrove swamp. The
crew and soldiers were safely landed, and were eventually rescued with
hardly any loss of life. As they were a large party they were safe from
the possible attacks of the natives, and they lived on stores rescued
from the wrecks.

In view of the number of wrecks that occurred on the islands and the
desirability of establishing there some harbour where vessels might
safely call for water or shelter from storms, the East India Company
again considered the question of colonizing the Andamans. When the
Company, at the end of the Indian Mutiny, found themselves with a large
number of prisoners on their hands, it was decided to create a new
Penal Settlement, and the site of the settlement of 1788 was chosen for
this purpose, and renamed Port Blair.

The Penal Settlement was established in March 1858, and has been in
existence ever since. The aborigines were hostile from the outset, and
gave much trouble by their raids. They made a determined effort to oust
the invaders from their country. To establish friendly relations with
them an institution known as the Andamanese Homes was founded, to
provide free rations and lodging, and medical attendance, to such of
them as could be induced to visit the Settlement. Through the efforts
of successive officers in charge of these Homes friendly relations were
established, first of all with the Aka-Bea tribe in the neighbourhood
of Port Blair, then with other tribes of the South Andaman, and at a
later date with the inhabitants of the North Andaman and the Little
Andaman. At the present day there is only one body of Andamanese still
persistently hostile, and these are the so-called J̌a̤rawa of the
interior of the South Andaman. These J̌a̤rawa, since about 1870, have
made repeated attacks on isolated parties of convicts and forest
workers and on the friendly Andamanese. Punitive expeditions have been
sent against them on several occasions, and attempts to set up friendly
relations with them have been made by leaving presents in their huts,
and by capturing some of them and keeping them for a time at Port
Blair. At the present time the J̌a̤rawa are as hostile as ever.

Although of one race throughout, the Andaman Islanders are divided into
several groups, with differences of language and culture. There are two
main divisions, which will be spoken of as the Great Andaman Group and
the Little Andaman Group respectively. The Great Andaman Group includes
all the natives of the Great Andaman with the exception of those of the
interior of the South Andaman who are known as J̌a̤rawa. The Little
Andaman Group includes all the inhabitants of the Little Andaman, those
of the North Sentinel Island and the J̌a̤rawa of the South Andaman.

These two different divisions exhibit many differences of language and
culture. All the languages of the Great Andaman Group are closely
related to one another. They have the same grammatical structure, and a
large number of roots are the same in all or in several of them. In the
same way the language of the J̌a̤rawa, so far as it is known, is very
similar to that of the natives of the Little Andaman. On the other hand
when the language of the Little Andaman is compared with the Great
Andaman languages there is a very striking difference. Of a vocabulary
of several hundred words collected in the Little Andaman there were
less than a dozen in which the root or stem was clearly the same as
that of words in the Great Andaman. While the grammatical structure of
the languages of the two groups is fundamentally the same, this can
only be shown in a somewhat detailed analysis, and there are many
important differences.

With regard to technical culture the same grouping appears. There is a
general similarity between all the tribes of the Great Andaman Group,
while the J̌a̤rawa and the inhabitants of the Little Andaman have a
technical culture of their own that is markedly different from that of
the other division.

The natives of the Great Andaman Group are divided into tribes, of
which there are ten, each with its own distinctive language or dialect,
and with a name. The following is a list of these tribes, passing from
north to south:—Aka-Čari, Aka-Ko̱ra, Aka-Bo, Aka-J̌eru, Aka-Kede,
Aka-Ko̱l, O̱ko̱-J̌uwo̱i, A-Pučikwar, Akar-Bale, and Aka-Bea. In each case
the name is given in the form in which it is used by the tribe itself.
Thus the Aka-Bea speak of the A-Pučikwar as Aka-Boǰig-yab, and refer to
the Akar-Bale as Aka-Bala-wa, and there are similar variants of other
tribal names.

The natives of the Little Andaman refer to themselves as Önge (men). It
is probable that the so-called J̌a̤rawa of the South Andaman have the
same word. In a vocabulary obtained by Colebrooke in 1790 from a J̌a̤rawa
near Port Blair, the word Mincopie is given as meaning a native of the
Andaman Islands. This would seem to be simply the same phrase as the
Little Andaman M’önge-bi = I am Önge, or I am a “man.” The word J̌a̤rawa
is apparently derived from the Aka-Bea language, but is now used by all
the friendly natives (i.e. the natives of the Great Andaman Group) to
denote those of the Little Andaman Group. In the official publications
dealing with the Andamans, however, the term J̌a̤rawa has come to be
applied solely to the hostile natives of the Great Andaman. It is in
this sense that the word is used in the present work, the name Önge
being reserved for the natives of the Little Andaman. It must be
remembered, however, that the so-called J̌a̤rawa probably call themselves
Önge, while the Önge of the Little Andaman are called J̌a̤rawa by the
natives of the friendly tribes of the Great Andaman. The name Mincopie
was at one time common in ethnological literature as a term for the
Andaman Islanders.

It is convenient to divide the tribes of the Great Andaman Group into
two subdivisions, to be spoken of as the Northern Group (including the
first four tribes mentioned above) and the Southern Group (including
the other six tribes). Between these two divisions there are a number
of differences of culture. They have, for example, different forms of
bow, and different kinds of baskets. The differences between them are
much slighter than those between the Great Andaman tribes and the
natives of the Little Andaman, but they are of sufficient importance to
make it necessary to distinguish them from one another.

The different divisions of the Andamanese may for convenience be set
out in the form of a table.


  I. Great Andaman Group.

      A. Northern Group, including the tribes:—

              Aka-Čari,
              Aka-Ko̱ra,
              Aka-Bo,
              Aka-J̌eru.

      B. Southern Group, including the tribes:—

              Aka-Kede,
              Aka-Ko̱l,
              O̱ko̱-J̌uwo̱i,
              A-Pučikwar,
              Akar-Bale,
              Aka-Bea.

  II. Little Andaman Group.

      A. The inhabitants of the Little Andaman (Önge).
      B. The J̌a̤rawa of the South Andaman.
      C. The inhabitants of the North Sentinel Island.


The distribution of these different groups as it was in 1858 is shown
on the map.

There is one important feature of this distribution that requires a few
words of explanation, and that is the presence in the South Andaman of
the J̌a̤rawa who are allied by language and technical culture to the
natives of the Little Andaman. There can be no doubt that the J̌a̤rawa
are the descendants of emigrants who at some time in the past made
their way across from the Little Andaman and thrust themselves in upon
the inhabitants of Rutland Island and the South Andaman, maintaining
their footing in the new country by force of arms.

The identity of the flora and fauna of the Little Andaman with those of
the Great Andaman and the shallowness of the strait between the
islands, suggests that at no very remote period they have been united
by a continuous land connection. Whether or not this connection existed
at the time when the islands were first peopled, it is at any rate
reasonable to suppose that the original ancestors of the present
Andamanese had one language and one culture. Once the Little Andaman
was peopled, the strait between it and the Great Andaman seems to have
acted as an effective barrier, to keep the two divisions of the race
apart for many centuries. During the period of this separation each
division followed its own line of development, with the result that
there arose the considerable differences of language and culture that
now exist.

At a much later date than this separation of the Andamanese into two
isolated groups, and after the typical differences of language and
culture had been developed, a party of natives must have made their way
by canoe from the north of the Little Andaman to Rutland Island. They
would have found that country occupied by natives of the Great Andaman
Group. In spite of this they succeeded in establishing themselves in
the South Andaman, and became the progenitors of the present J̌a̤rawa.
Owing to the difference of language all communication between the
Little Andaman invaders and those already occupying the invaded country
would be impossible. (At the present day a native of the Little Andaman
cannot make himself understood to a native of one of the Great Andaman
tribes.) The result has been that the J̌a̤rawa have lived in a state of
constant warfare with their neighbours, and this hostility has lasted
down to the present day.

It is only on the above hypothesis that it is possible to explain how
it comes about that we find in the South Andaman people with language
and technical culture very similar to that of the Little Andaman, and
differing from that of the remaining inhabitants of the Great Andaman.
It is impossible to say how long it is since this invasion from the
Little Andaman took place. At the end of the eighteenth century the
J̌a̤rawa were to be found in the neighbourhood of Port Blair. Lieutenant
Colebrooke in 1790 came across an individual of this tribe and obtained
from him a vocabulary. A comparison of this vocabulary with the
language of the Little Andaman shows it to be essentially the same
language [13].

A few words must be said on the position of the natives of the North
Sentinel Island. Almost nothing is known of these people. What little
information is available concerning their weapons and implements seems
to point to their belonging to the Little Andaman Division. There is no
communication between them and either the Great Andaman or the Little
Andaman. It is possible that they have been separated from the other
Andamanese as long as those of the Little Andaman have been separated
from those of the Great Andaman, and would therefore constitute a third
separate division. The South Sentinel Island is uninhabited.

The total area of the Andamans is estimated to be about 2500 square
miles. This area is divided as follows:—


                                                             Sq. miles.
    North Andaman, being the territory of the four tribes         540
    Aka-Cari, Aka-Kora, Aka-Bo, and Aka-Jeru
    Middle Andaman and Baratang, occupied by four tribes,         790
    Aka-Kede, Aka-Kol, Oko-Juwoi and A-Pucikwar
    The Archipelago, occupied by the Akar-Bale tribe              140
    The South Andaman, occupied by the Aka-Bea and the Jarawa     630
    North Sentinel Island                                          30
    Little Andaman                                                370
                                                                 ----
                                                                 2500


It is not possible to give accurately the area occupied by each tribe,
as the boundaries are difficult to discover. The Aka-Bea is in an
exceptional position, as there was no definite boundary between them
and the J̌a̤rawa. The two parties of natives lived in the same territory
at enmity with each other. It would seem that the Aka-Bea kept on the
whole more to the coast, while the J̌a̤rawa lived in the interior.

Leaving aside the Aka-Bea, the largest of the Great Andaman tribes, as
regards area of territory, was the Aka-Kede, which possessed over 300
square miles. After this tribe in order of size come the A-Pučikwar,
Aka-J̌eru and Aka-Ko̱ra tribes, while the smaller ones are the O̱ko̱-J̌uwo̱i,
Aka-Ko̱l, Aka-Bo, Akar-Bale and Aka-Čari, the last being perhaps the
smallest of all.

In 1901 an enumeration of the natives of the Great Andaman was
attempted in connection with the census of India. Such an enumeration
was of course very difficult, and liable to considerable error. The
results are given in the following table:—


    Name of Tribe   Adults               Children          Total
                    Males   Females      Males   Females
    Aka-Cari         16       15           6        2        39
    Aka-Kora         31       32          14       19        96
    Aka-Bo           15       16           7       10        48
    Aka-Jeru         98       80          26       14       218
    Aka-Kede         24       30           3        2        59
    Aka-Kol           6        2           3                 11
    Oko-Juwoi        21       19           7        1        48
    A-Pucikwar       31       14           2        3        50
    Akar-Bale         5       10           3        1        19
    Aka-Bea          14       16           3        4        37
                    ---      ---          --       --       ---
        Total       261      234          74       56       625


These figures are likely to be more accurate for the southern tribes
(the last five on the list) than for the northern tribes. It is
probable that, in the North Andaman, some of the persons enumerated
were entered under the wrong tribe. For many years the officers of the
Andamans did not know of the existence of the Aka-Ko̱ra and Aka-Bo
tribes, and members of these tribes have fallen into the habit of
describing themselves to Europeans as either Aka-J̌eru or Aka-Čari. My
own opinion is that the numbers given for the Aka-J̌eru tribe are too
large, while those of the Aka-Ko̱ra and Aka-Bo, and perhaps also the
Aka-Kede, are too small.

For the census of 1901 an attempt was made to estimate the numbers of
the J̌a̤rawa and the natives of the Little Andaman, any attempt at
enumeration being impossible. The estimate given was as follows:—


                      Little Andaman           672
                      South Andaman Jarawa     117
                      Rutland Island Jarawa    351
                      North Sentinel Island    117
                                              ----
                         Total                1257


This estimate is not of any great value. As regards the Little Andaman,
my own information would lead me to estimate their numbers at between
600 and 700, thus agreeing with the estimate above. Concerning the
North Sentinel Island nothing is known on which a satisfactory estimate
could be based. The figures for the Rutland Island J̌a̤rawa are certainly
very much too high. In 1907 I spent some weeks on Rutland Island trying
to get into touch with the J̌a̤rawa there. At that time there were
certainly not more than 50 all told on the island. I was only able to
discover one camp, and that had been deserted just before it was
discovered, but had not contained a dozen persons. The Rutland Island
J̌a̤rawa have been cut off from the other J̌a̤rawa by the spread of the
convict Settlement since about 1885. The majority of the J̌a̤rawa now
inhabit the interior and western coast of the South Andaman north of
Port Blair.

During the last fifty years the numbers of the Andamanese have been
greatly diminished. This has been the result of the European occupation
of the islands, and is chiefly due to new diseases that have been
introduced amongst them. Syphilis was introduced among the tribes of
the South Andaman about 1870, and this has now spread among all the
Great Andaman tribes (that is, excluding the hostile J̌a̤rawa). A large
number of natives are infected, and the disease is responsible directly
and indirectly for a considerable increase in the death-rate. In March,
1877, an epidemic of measles broke out among the Andamanese, introduced
with a batch of convicts from Madras, and spread rapidly from one end
of the Great Andaman to the other. In six weeks 51 out of 184 cases
treated in hospital proved fatal. It is almost certain that the
proportion of deaths was much greater in the case of those, the vast
majority, to whom no medical aid could be given. A writer on the
Andamans [14] has estimated that the mortality from measles and its
sequelae was one-half if not two-thirds of the whole population of the
Great Andaman. Other diseases which were formerly unknown to the
islands seem also to have been introduced, including influenza.

While the death-rate amongst the friendly Andamanese has been
enormously increased, the birth-rate has at the same time fallen to
almost nothing. This is evident from the proportion of adults to
children in the population table given above. In 1907, out of a total
of about 500 natives whom I saw at different times, there were not more
than a dozen children of less than five years old. A birth is a rare
occurrence, and of the children born very few survive infancy.

This decrease of population has not as yet affected the Little Andaman.
The natives of this island have had very little contact with the Penal
Settlement or with the tribes of the Great Andaman, and have thus
escaped the diseases which are mainly responsible for the depopulation
of the larger island.

Several attempts have been made to estimate the former population of
the Andamans. In the “Census Report” for 1901 the estimate given is
4800 for the whole group. Mr M. V. Portman has given an estimate of
8000. It seemed to me that one of these is too small and the other too
large. Judging from what it is possible to learn about the habits of
the natives, and the food supply available, I should estimate that the
former population of the islands (in 1858) was about 5500 [15]. An
estimate for the proportion of the different groups is as follows:—


                                   Estimated former   Density per
                                      population.     square mile.

    North Andaman (four tribes)          1500            2·75
    Middle Andaman with Baratang         2250            2·5
    and Ritchie’s Archipelago
    South Andaman (Aka-Bea and Jarawa)   1200            2·0
    Little Andaman and North Sentinel     700            1·75
                                         ----            ----
           Total                         5650            2·25


With regard to the comparative density per square mile of the different
groups it may be pointed out that the reason for the smaller density of
the South Andaman is the fact that the Aka-Bea and J̌a̤rawa were living
there at war with one another, and the territory was therefore probably
not so fully occupied as in other parts of the islands where boundaries
between neighbouring tribes were well defined. The food supply of the
Little Andaman does not seem to be so abundant as that of the Great
Andaman in proportion to its area. It must be remembered that length of
coast-line is of more importance to the Andamanese than the actual area
of their country. The natives of the Little Andaman are not able to
harpoon turtle and large fish, which constitute an important element of
the food supply of the tribes of the Great Andaman.

If the figures of the above estimate be correct, it will be seen that
the population of the North Andaman has been reduced in less than fifty
years (1858–1901) to about 27 per cent. of its former volume, while in
the same period the population of the Middle Andaman and South Andaman
has been reduced to about 18 per cent. As the tribes in the south were
the first to come into contact with the Settlement, their numbers have
diminished more rapidly than those of the northern tribes. It is
probable that in another fifty years the natives of the Great Andaman
tribes will be extinct.

The diminution of population has combined with other causes to alter
considerably the mode of life of the islanders. What were formerly
distinct and often hostile communities are now merged together. The
different languages have become corrupt, and some tribes have adopted
customs of other tribes and have abandoned their own. Most of the
younger men and women of the friendly tribes of the Great Andaman now
speak a little Hindustani (Urdu) in a somewhat corrupt form. The
friendly natives are under the charge of an officer of the Settlement,
known as the Officer in Charge of the Andamanese. A Home and Hospital
are provided for them in Port Blair, and natives from all parts, even
from the extreme north, go there either to be treated in the Hospital
or to stay at the Home. During certain parts of the year some of the
natives are employed in collecting trepang (bêche de mer) under the
direction of petty officers, who are natives of India or Burma. The
trepang, together with wild honey and shells collected by the
Andamanese, is sold, and the money is devoted to the service of the
Andamanese Department. There is also a grant of money from the
Government of India, in return for which the Officer in Charge must,
when necessary, provide Andamanese to track and capture any convicts
who may run away from the Penal Settlement. The funds thus made
available serve to provide the natives with blankets, cloth, iron tools
and scrap iron, rice, sugar, tea and tobacco. The result of this system
is that there is a free circulation of natives in all parts of the
Great Andaman. Whereas, formerly, the natives kept carefully to their
own part of the country, they now make long journeys, either in their
own canoes, or in Government launches, and members of the northern
tribes are to be found at Port Blair and elsewhere in the south, while
men and women of the southern tribes are to be found engaged in
collecting trepang in the north.

The natives of the Little Andaman have as yet scarcely been affected by
these changes. Within recent years, however, some of the natives of the
northern part of the Little Andaman have been in the habit of making
periodical visits to Rutland Island in their canoes, and occasionally
come as far as Port Blair. Their chief reason for visiting the
Settlement is to obtain iron for their arrows and adzes, but they have
also begun to appreciate sugar and tobacco.

The manners and customs of the Andaman Islanders have formed the
subject of a number of writings. By far the most important of these is
a work by Mr E. H. Man, who was for some years an officer of the Penal
Settlement of Port Blair, and for four years of that time was in charge
of the Andamanese Home. Mr Man made a special study of the language of
the Aka-Bea tribe and compiled an extensive vocabulary, which, however,
has never been published. His observations on the manners and customs
of this tribe and others of the South Andaman were published in the
Journal of the Anthropological Institute of the year 1882 (Volume XII),
and were reprinted in the form of a book On the Aboriginal Inhabitants
of the Andaman Islands. As the reprint is difficult to obtain, the
references to Mr Man’s work in the chapters that follow are all to the
pages of the Journal of the Anthropological Institute, Volume XII.

Another writer on the Andamanese is Mr M. V. Portman, who was for some
years an officer of the Andaman Commission, and was for a long time in
charge of the Andamanese. His Manual of the Andamanese Languages,
London, 1887, is full of errors and entirely unreliable. A later work,
entitled Notes on the Languages of the South Andaman Group of Tribes,
Calcutta, 1898, is of much greater value, and though not entirely free
from errors, is on the whole useful and accurate. Mr Portman has also
compiled A History of Our Relations with the Andamanese (2 volumes,
Calcutta, 1899), which contains a mass of information on the subject
with which it deals, but does not add very much to our knowledge of the
Andamanese themselves. The British Museum possesses an excellent
collection of photographs of the Andamanese taken by Mr Portman.

A good general description of the islands and of their inhabitants by
Colonel Sir Richard Temple, who was for many years Chief Commissioner
of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, is contained in Volume III of the
Census of India, 1901, here referred to as “Census Report” 1901.








CHAPTER I

THE SOCIAL ORGANISATION


In the present chapter we are to deal with the customs and institutions
by which the natives of the Great Andaman regulate the conduct of
persons one to another. At the outset it is necessary to get as clear
an idea as possible of the structure of the Andamanese society. That
structure, as will be shown, is extremely simple.

What is really of interest to the ethnologist is the social
organisation of these tribes as it existed before the European
occupation of the islands. The changes that have taken place in recent
years have been extensive, the most important being the great
diminution in numbers and the merging together of what were formerly
distinct and often hostile communities. It is fairly easy, however, to
discover from the natives themselves what was the constitution of the
society in former times, though there remain a few points about which
no satisfactory information can be obtained.

When the islands were first occupied by the British, before
depopulation had affected their institutions, the natives of the Great
Andaman were to be found living in small communities scattered over the
islands, mostly on the coast, but some of them in the forest of the
interior of the island. Each such community, which will be spoken of as
a “local group,” was independent and autonomous, leading its own life
and regulating its own affairs. Each group had occasional relations
with other neighbouring groups; visitors might pass from one to
another; or the two groups might meet together for a few days and join
in feasting and dancing. On the other hand there were often quarrels
between neighbouring groups, which might result in a state of feud
between them for many months. Between communities separated from one
another by a distance of only 50 miles or even less there were no
direct relations whatever. The members of one community kept to their
own part of the country, only leaving it to visit their friends within
a narrow radius.

These local groups were united into what are here called tribes. A
tribe consisted of a number of local groups all speaking what the
natives themselves regard as one language, each tribe having its own
language and its name. The tribe was of very little importance in
regulating the social life, and was merely a loose aggregate of
independent local groups.

The local groups are further distinguished by the natives themselves as
being of two kinds according as they lived on the coast or inland. This
division was independent of that into tribes. Some tribes consisted of
coast-dwellers only, while others included both coast-dwellers and
forest-dwellers.

Within the local group the only division was that into families. A
family consists of a man and his wife and their unmarried children own
or adopted.

These were the only social divisions existing among the Andamanese, who
were without any of those divisions known as “clans” which are
characteristic of many primitive societies.

The natives of the Great Andaman (leaving aside the J̌a̤rawa, who by
language and culture belong to the Little Andaman division of the race)
are divided into ten tribes, each occupying a certain area of country.
Each tribe consists of a number of persons who speak what is regarded
by the natives themselves as one language. That the tribe is
fundamentally a linguistic group is shown by the tribal names. These
are all formed from a stem with the prefix aka-, which prefix is used
in the languages of the Great Andaman to convey a reference to the
mouth and thereby to the function of speech. Thus in the Aka-J̌eru
language the stem poŋ means “a hole of any kind,” and aka-poŋ means
“the mouth,” there being no other word for that part of the body. In
the same language the stem -ar- meaning “to talk” can only be used with
the prefix aka-, as ak’-ar-ka, “he says.” The prefix which is
characteristic of the tribal names, indicates, therefore, that these
are really the names of languages.

The meanings or derivations of some of the tribal names have not been
ascertained with certainty. The name Aka-Čari is derived from the word
čari meaning “salt water,” and therefore means “the salt-water
language.” Similarly the name Aka-J̌eru is derived from ǰeru, a species
of Sterculia from which canoes are made. In the Northern languages the
word ot-bo means “the back” of anything, and oŋ-ko̱ra means “the hand.”
It is possible that the names Aka-Bo and Aka-Ko̱ra are derived from
these stems (the ot- and the oŋ- being prefixes), but there is no
evidence that they are associated with them in the minds of the natives
of the present day. Among the Southern tribes the name Akar-Bale is
derived from a word meaning “the other side” of a creek or strait, thus
referring to their position in the Archipelago. The name A-Pučik-war
(of which the Aka-Bea equivalent is Aka-Boǰig-yab) means “those who
speak our own language,” from a stem pučik (Aka-Bea, boǰig) which means
“belonging to ourselves” as opposed to strangers of the same race. Mr
Portman [16] gives the following meanings of the other tribal names of
the South and Middle Andaman, but the derivations are somewhat
doubtful.


            Aka-Bea      Fresh water.
            O̱ko̱-J̌uwo̱i   They cut patterns on their bows.
            Aka-Ko̱l      Bitter or salt taste.


I may take this opportunity of pointing out two errors in the names of
the tribes given in the “Census Report” of 1901. The name Aka-Čari is
given as Aka-Chariar; the stem -ar- means “to talk” and is not an
essential part of the tribal name; Aka-Čari-ar-bom means “he talks the
Čari language.” The name Aka-Bo is given as Aka-Tabo; t’a-Bo means “I
(am) Aka-Bo,” just as t’a-J̌eru means “I (am) Aka-J̌eru,” the prefix aka-
being contracted to a- after the personal pronoun t’ = I or my.

Although the natives themselves thus recognize and give names to ten
distinct languages, all of them are closely related. There is, on the
whole, not a great deal of difference between two neighbouring
languages. A man of the Aka-J̌eru tribe could understand without any
great difficulty a man speaking Aka-Bo. On the other hand many of the
languages included two or even more distinct dialects. In the Akar-Bale
tribe there were two dialects, one in the southern half of the
Archipelago, which was allied to Aka-Bea, and the other in the northern
half, showing affinities with A-Pučikwar. Even in such a small tribe as
the Aka-Čari it would seem that there were differences of dialect.
Thus, even from the point of view of language, the tribe was not
entirely homogeneous.

Leaving aside the Aka-Bea, the average extent of territory occupied by
a tribe was about 165 square miles. Of the nine tribes the largest, as
regards area, was the Aka-Kede, with over 300 square miles, while the
smallest was probably the Aka-Čari, with less than 100 square miles.
Save in the case of the Akar-Bale tribe, which occupied the islands of
Ritchie’s Archipelago, it is difficult to find any marked geographical
features that might be supposed to have determined the extent and the
boundaries of the different tribes.

The Aka-Bea tribe was in an abnormal position as there was no
recognized boundary between them and the J̌a̤rawa. Together, these two
divisions of the Andamanese occupied an area of about 600 square miles.
The Aka-Bea seem to have kept more to the coast while the J̌a̤rawa
occupied the interior of the South Andaman and Rutland Island.

If the estimate previously given [17] of the former population of the
islands be correct, the nine tribes (leaving aside the Aka-Bea) would
have formerly contained about 3750 persons of all ages. At the present
time the four tribes of the North Andaman number altogether about 400,
of whom about 100 or less are children. The other six tribes taken
together (including the almost extinct Aka-Bea) number about 200, of
whom not more than 30 are children. Mr Man estimated the numbers of the
Aka-Bea tribe (called by him Boǰig-ŋiǰi-da) in 1882 at about 400, and
supposes them to have numbered about 1000 in 1858. In 1901 that tribe
consisted of only 37 persons.

Besides the division into tribes, and independent of it, the Andamanese
recognize another division into coast-dwellers and forest-dwellers. In
the Aka-Bea language the coast-dwellers are called Ar-yoto, while the
forest-dwellers are called Erem-taga. The difference between them is
due solely to the difference of their food supply. The Ar-yoto obtain
much of their food from the sea. They are expert in fishing and turtle
hunting. They make canoes and use them not only for hunting but also
for travelling from one camp to another. Some portion of their food
they also obtain from the forest, edible roots and fruits and the flesh
of the wild pig being the chief. On the other hand the Erem-taga rely
solely on the forest and the inland creeks for their food supply. Their
only use for canoes is in the creeks. They are entirely ignorant of
such matters as turtle or dugong hunting, but they are more at home
than the coast-dwellers in the forest, and are generally more skilful
at pig-hunting. The advantage certainly rests with the coast-dwellers,
for they have both the sea and the forest to draw upon for their
sustenance.

Some tribes consist only of coast-dwellers, such as the Aka-Čari, the
Akar-Bale and perhaps the Aka-Ko̱l. On the other hand the Aka-Bo,
although their territory includes a part of the west coast, are, by
their occupations and mode of life, forest-dwellers, and the same seems
to have been the case of the O̱ko̱-J̌uwo̱i. The A-Pučikwar, the Aka-Kede,
the Aka-J̌eru and perhaps also the Aka-Ko̱ra tribes contained both
coast-dwellers and forest-dwellers.

Each tribe formerly consisted of a number of independent local groups.
The local group, and not the tribe, was the land-owning group, each one
owning or exercising hunting rights over a certain recognized area. At
the present time, owing to the breakdown of the local organisation,
through the settlement of the islands and the resulting decrease of
population, it is difficult to ascertain what area of country was
occupied by each of these local groups. In many cases it would seem
that the boundaries between two neighbouring groups are not very
clearly defined, there being portions of forest over which the members
of both hunted when the groups were at peace [18]. There is no doubt
that in the more favourable localities, particularly on the coast, the
country occupied by a single group was smaller than in places of less
abundant food supply. It is probable that the forest-dwelling local
groups occupied considerably larger areas in each case than the coast
groups. Some of the coast-dwelling groups seem to have occupied areas
of less than ten square miles.

It is not easy to discover at this time exactly what number of persons
would have been included in one local group. Mouat, who visited the
islands in 1857–8, says of the natives, “They are rarely or never seen
living alone, several of their little huts being raised in the same
locality, where they dwell together in numbers varying between thirty
and three hundred [19].” In another passage he states, “They are
generally divided into small groups, the numbers of which vary
considerably, some not containing more than ten individuals, while in
others as many as two or three hundred may be found. The great majority
of these groups of the natives consist on an average of from thirty to
fifty men, women, and children, although sometimes as many as three
hundred are found together [20].” It is probable that, if so small a
party as ten were seen, they were a hunting party spending a day or a
few days away from the main camp. On the other hand so large a number
as three hundred could only be found together on the occasion of one of
the periodical meetings of several local groups for purposes of
festivity. Mouat’s statement that the groups consisted on the average
of from thirty to fifty persons, agrees very well with the statements
of the natives themselves, and may be taken as being fairly accurate.
Mr Man, writing in 1882, speaks of the Andamanese as divided into
communities “each consisting of from twenty to fifty individuals,” and
elsewhere says that “permanent encampments vary in size and consist of
several huts, which in all are rarely inhabited by more than from fifty
to eighty persons [21].”

From the information that I was able to obtain from the natives
themselves I came to the conclusion that an average local group
consisted of from 40 to 50 persons of all ages, the average number of
local groups to a tribe being about 10. This would give the average
extent of country occupied by each local group as about 16 square
miles, but some groups certainly had a larger territory than this and
some had smaller.

Mr M. V. Portman speaks of the tribes of the southern part of the Great
Andaman as being divided into what he calls “septs,” but he does not
explain what he means by that term. He states that the Aka-Bea were
divided into seven septs, the A-Pučikwar into four, the Akar-Bale into
two, while the Aka-Ko̱l and O̱ko̱-J̌uwo̱i had no real subdivisions [22].
Whatever Mr Portman may have meant by the term sept, it is clear that
he did not use it to denote what is here called a local group, but some
larger subdivision of the tribe. What these septs seem to have been are
groups consisting each of four or five local groups having friendly
relations with one another and meeting together occasionally at the
festival gatherings to be described later in the present chapter.

There were, strictly speaking, no distinctive names for the local
groups. A local group might be denoted by a reference to the district
that it occupied or to one of its chief camping places. Thus, in the
Akar-Bale tribe, those occupying the island of Teb-ǰuru were spoken of
as Teb-ǰuru-wa, the word wa meaning “people,” and the inhabitants of
the east coast of Havelock Island were similarly denoted as
Puluga-l’ar-mugu-wa from the name of the district that they occupied.
In the tribes of the North Andaman the word equivalent to wa of the
South is koloko. Some of the local groups of the Aka-Bo tribe were
distinguished as Teraut buliu koloko, Kelera buliu koloko, Teradikili
buliu koloko etc., from the names of the creeks (buliu) that they
occupied. In the Aka-Čari tribe the local group occupying the island of
To̱nmuket and the adjoining mainland were called Taroto̱lo koloko. When a
man was asked to what part of the country he belonged he would
generally answer by mentioning one of the chief camping places of his
local group. Thus a man of the Taroto̱lo koloko might say that he
belonged to Laropuli, this being one of the chief camps of that
country. A man of the Teraut buliu koloko might similarly say that he
belonged to the village of Čaičue.

A man or woman is generally regarded as belonging to the local group in
the country of which he or she was born. There is nothing, however, to
prevent a person from taking up his residence with any other local
group if he so wishes, and if the members of that group are willing to
welcome him. It would seem that there were a fair number of such cases
in which a man or a woman left his or her own local group to join
another. In particular, when two young people belonging to different
groups got married they might fix their residence either with his or
with her parents.

The local group, as stated above, was characterised as the land-owning
group. A man might hunt over the country of his own group at all times,
but he might not hunt over the country of another group without the
permission of the members of that group. Even at the present day, when
the local organisation has largely broken down, some of these hunting
rights are still observed. I noticed a case in which some of the men
asked and obtained permission to hunt pig in a certain part from a man
who was explained to be the owner of that part of the country, being
one of the few survivors of the local group to which it belonged. It
would, in former times, have been an offence that might easily have led
to a serious quarrel for the men of one group to hunt or fish in the
country or the waters of another group without having been granted
permission to do so.

Within the territory of each local group there are a number of
recognized camping places. During the greater part of every year the
members of the local group would be found living together at one or
other of these. Some of these camping-grounds have been in use for many
centuries, as is shown by the heaps of refuse many feet deep, chiefly
consisting of the shells of molluscs and the bones of animals. Such
kitchen-middens, as they have been called, are to be found in numbers
all around the coasts of the islands.

In the case of the coast-dwelling communities the camping sites are
always close to the sea-shore or to a creek, so that they can be
reached by canoe. In the case of those dwelling inland this is of
course not so. In any case one of the chief factors determining the
choice of the site is the existence of a supply of fresh water. This is
of extreme importance in the case of a site to be occupied during the
dry season when fresh water becomes scarce.

Within their own territory the local group is what we may speak of as
semi-nomadic. The coast-dwellers rarely reside continuously at the same
spot for more than a few months, but shift from one camp to another,
moved by different causes. If a death occurs the camp is deserted for
several months and a new one is occupied. A change of camp often takes
place at a change of season, some spots presenting particular
advantages, such as shelter from the prevailing wind, or better hunting
or fishing, at certain times of the year. Another cause of the
abandonment of a camp by the coast-dwellers is that all refuse is
thrown away close to the camp, and after a few months the decaying
animal matter thus accumulated renders the spot uninhabitable. The
natives seem to find it easier to move their camp than to clear away
their refuse. The truth is, perhaps, that they are so accustomed to
change their camp from one spot to another, in order to make the best
use of the natural resources available, that there is no necessity for
them to take those sanitary measures that would be essential if they
wished to remain for many months continuously at the same place.

The forest-dwellers are less nomadic in their habits than the
coast-dwellers. One of the reasons for this is that as they cannot
convey their belongings from one place to another by canoe, but must
carry them overland, the moving of a camp is a more tiresome business
with them than it is with the coast-dwellers. During a great part of
the year the forest-dwellers were accustomed to remain at one camp,
which was thus the chief camp of the group. In particular they would
spend there the whole of the rainy season. During the cool and hot
seasons they would leave the chief camp for a few months, leading
during that time a more nomadic life, living in temporary hunting camps
and paying visits to their friends in other groups. At the opening of
the rainy season they would return once more to the main camp.

The camps of the natives of the Great Andaman may be distinguished as
being of three kinds. Of the first kind are what may be spoken of as
permanent encampments. Certainly every group of the forest-dwellers,
and probably every group of the coast-dwellers had its permanent
encampment, which was, so to speak, the headquarters of the group. At
this spot there would be erected either a communal hut, or a carefully
built village. Communal huts have in recent times fallen into disuse,
as the natives now wander about the islands much more freely than was
their wont. I did not see a single one in the Great Andaman during my
visit, though I was told of one that was falling to ruins in the
interior of the Middle Andaman. One such communal hut was photographed
in 1895 by M. L. Lapicque, at a spot called Lekera-l’un-ta [23]. It was
perhaps the last that the natives of the Great Andaman erected. What
the communal hut was like it is possible to discover both from the
statements of the natives and also from the fact that they are still to
the present day used by the natives of the Little Andaman and by the
J̌a̤rawa. The hut was roughly circular in form and might be as big as 60
feet in diameter and 20 or 30 feet high at the centre. The shape was
somewhat that of a beehive. Two concentric circles, one of tall posts
near the centre and the other of shorter posts near the circumference,
were connected by horizontal and sloping roof-timbers, and on these
were laid and fastened a number of mats of palm-leaves. These mats
reached, as a rule, as far as the ground, a small doorway being left on
one side.

Such communal huts, while still used in the Little Andaman and by the
J̌a̤rawa, and formerly used by the forest-dwellers of the Great Andaman,
were apparently not often erected by the coast-dwellers of the larger
island at the time the islands were occupied in 1858. Mr Man seems to
have regarded them as being peculiarly characteristic of the J̌a̤rawa and
the natives of the Little Andaman [24]. There is evidence, however,
that even the coast-dwellers formerly erected such huts, for in the
Akar-Bale tribe there are several places with names such as Paruŋ Bud
and Golugma Bud, which show that communal huts existed there at some
time. The word bud is used to denote a communal hut, as compared with a
village, which is called baraiǰ.

A large communal hut took some little time to erect. The posts had to
be cut and erected, this being the work of the men, and the palm-leaves
had to be collected and then made into mats by the women. Once the hut
was built it would last for several years, and if it were in fairly
constant use, particularly if it were not abandoned in the rains, it
might be used, with a little occasional patching, for ten years or even
more.

Among the coast-dwellers it was more usual to erect at the headquarters
a semi-permanent village. A portion of such a village is shown in the
photographs reproduced in Plates VI and VII.

The village occupied a small clearing in the forest close to the
sea-shore at a place called Mo̱i-lepto in the country of the Akar-Bale
tribe. A spring or soak close to the village provided the fresh water.
The site is a favourite one as it is well sheltered, and is within
convenient distance of good fishing and turtle hunting grounds. It was
formerly one of the chief camping places of the local group known as
the Boroin wa (Hill people).

The village was composed of eight huts, ranged round a central open
space, and all of them facing inwards towards the centre. This open
space is kept clear and clean for dancing, and is simply the village
dancing ground. Each of the single huts was occupied by a family group,
consisting of a man and his wife with their children and dependants.
One hut was occupied by an old widower and a bachelor.

The way the huts are built can be seen in the photographs. In the
simplest form the hut consists of a sloping roof made of palm-leaves,
erected on four posts, two taller ones at the front and two short ones
at the back. A hut of this kind is shown in Plate VII. If more shelter
is required a second roof is added in such a way that the top of one
overhangs the top of the other. In some cases a third roof may be added
on one side. In Plates VI and VII two mats of palm-leaf are shown in
the course of construction, lying on the ground.

Huts such as these, in which the leaves are first made into a mat which
is then attached to the rafters, will last for some time. Even if the
village be deserted for several weeks, at any rate in the dry weather,
very little work will be needed to make it habitable again when the
occupants return to it.

A second kind of camp was made when the natives did not intend to stay
more than two to three months. Such camps were erected by the forest
folk during the dry season, or at any time when they were compelled to
leave their chief camp through the death there of one of their number.
Such a temporary camp is always put up in the form of a village, and
never as a communal hut. The huts are similar to those already
described, but are made more carelessly. The thatching leaves, instead
of being made into mats, are simply tied in bundles on to the rafters.
A hut of this kind will last quite well for three months or so and it
can be built very rapidly at any place where there is a sufficient
supply of thatching leaves. At the present day the natives rarely build
a permanent camp for themselves, but are contented with temporary camps
of the kind here described.

A third kind of camp remains to be briefly mentioned, which we may call
the hunting camp. A hunting party (which may include women as well as
men) spending a few days away from one of the main camps will erect for
themselves a few huts or shelters consisting of nothing more than a
simple lean-to of leaves.

Caves or rock shelters suitable for human occupation are almost unknown
in the Andamans. In the Archipelago there are one or two small rock
shelters that are occasionally used by a hunting party away from home
for a night. I was told by the natives that on one of the islands off
the west coast of the North Andaman there is a rock shelter of a fair
size that was formerly used as one of their chief camps.

The following figure will give an idea of the Andamanese village and
its arrangement. In hunting camps which are intended only to be
occupied for a few days or a few weeks, this arrangement is not
observed, but the huts or shelters are placed so as to give shelter
from the prevailing wind with no particular regard to the respective
position of the different units.

The constitution of the local group is illustrated by the arrangement
of the village. The whole village consists of a number of separate
huts, each hut occupied by a family. A family consists of a man and his
wife and such of their children own or adopted as are not of an age to
be independent. Besides the families each group necessarily contains a
small number of unmarried men and widowers and some unmarried girls and
widows. The unmarried men and widowers without children occupy a
separate hut (or huts) which we may speak of as the bachelors’ hut. Mr
Man states that the spinsters (i.e., the unmarried women who are of
marriageable age) and widows occupy a hut of their own similarly to the
bachelors [25]. In the camps that I visited I did not find any such
spinsters’ hut. What unmarried females there were, I found attached to
one or other of the families of the village, each one living in the hut
of some married relative, generally the parent or foster-parent.

All the huts face inwards towards an open space which is the dancing
ground of the village, and, except in exposed situations, are generally
entirely open in front. At some convenient spot on one side of the
dancing ground is to be found the communal cooking place of the
village. This is generally close to the bachelors’ hut, as it is the
bachelors who attend to such cooking as is carried on there. Besides
the public cooking place each family has its own fireplace in its own
hut, on which a fire is kept continually alight. In the village two or
more families may build their huts adjoining one another in such a way
that they become for all practical purposes one hut, of which each
family retains its own special portion. Two brothers will thus often
make a sort of common household.

The communal hut, in the way in which it is arranged, and even in the
way in which it is built, is really a village with all the huts drawn
together so that each one is joined to the one next to it and the roofs
meet in the middle. In the centre of the hut there is an open space
corresponding to the dancing ground of the village. It is even used as
a dancing ground, though for this purpose it is somewhat small. It is
the public part of the hut. Around this are arranged the different
families, each occupying its own special portion of the hut, which is
marked off by means of short lengths of wood laid on the floor. The
public cooking place is sometimes inside the hut, and there is the
space marked off for the unmarried men. The advantage of the communal
hut is that it affords a better protection from the weather; its
disadvantage is that it leaves almost no room for dancing.

Thus it may be seen that the arrangement of the camp shows very plainly
the constitution of a local group, consisting as it does of a few
families. Each group seems to have contained, on an average, about ten
families, with a few unmarried males and females.

The Andaman Islanders depend for their subsistence entirely on the
natural products of the sea and the forest. From the sea they obtain
dugong, turtle (both green and hawksbill), an enormous variety of
different sorts of fish, crustaceans (crabs, crayfish and prawns) and
molluscs. Fish and crabs are also to be found in the salt-water creeks
which in many places penetrate inland for some miles. From the forest
they obtain the flesh of the wild pig, wild honey, and a large number
of vegetable foods—roots, fruits, and seeds.

The life of the forest folk is more simple and uniform than that of the
coast people and we may therefore consider it first. During the rainy
season, which lasts from the middle of May to the end of September, the
local group lives at its headquarters camp, which, as we have seen,
formerly often took the form of a communal hut. During this season
animal food is plentiful, as the jungle animals are in good condition;
on the other hand there is not much vegetable food to be obtained. The
following brief account will give an idea of how the day is spent in
such a camp at that time of year. Some time after sunrise the camp
begins to be astir. The various members of the community make a meal of
any food that may have been saved from the day before. The men start
off for the day’s hunting. At the present time dogs are used for
pig-hunting. These dogs were obtained in the first instance from the
Settlement of Port Blair, and their use in pig-hunting was learnt from
the Burmese convicts. Nowadays every married man has at least one dog
[26]. Before the dogs were obtained, hunting was a pursuit requiring a
great deal more skill than it does at present. A hunting party consists
of from two to five men. Each man carries his bow and two or three pig
arrows, and one of the party carries a smouldering fire-brand. They
make their way through the jungle until they find the fresh tracks of a
pig, or follow up some of the usual pig runs until they come upon the
animal feeding. In former days much skill was required to creep
noiselessly through the jungle until they were sufficiently near either
to discharge an arrow, or, if the jungle were more open, to rush in
upon the animal shouting and shoot it before it could escape. At the
present day it is the dogs that scent out the pig and bring it to bay,
when the natives shoot it with their arrows.

When a pig has been killed it may be tied up and carried to the camp on
the shoulders of one of the hunters, or a fire may be lighted then and
there and the pig eviscerated and roasted. A cut is made in the abdomen
and the viscera removed. The cavity is filled with leaves, the joints
of the legs are half severed and the carcase is placed on the fire and
turned over and shifted until every part is evenly roasted. It is then
removed from the fire, the burnt skin is scraped clean and the meat is
cut up. Meanwhile the intestines or some of the internal organs are
cooked and eaten by the hunters. The meat is tied up in leaves and is
carried to the camp. If the pig be carried home whole the process of
roasting it and cutting it up is performed in exactly the same way at
the public cooking place of the camp, the meat being distributed only
after it has been thus partially cooked.

If the hunting party should come across a civet cat (Paradoxurus) or a
monitor lizard they would endeavour to kill it [27], but the main
object of every hunting party is to obtain pork. Snakes and even rats
are killed and eaten. Birds, though plentiful in the islands, are not
often obtained, for the density of the jungle and the height of the
trees in which the birds conceal themselves, make it very difficult for
the natives to shoot them with their bows and arrows. A man does not
care to risk the loss of his arrow in a chance shot at a bird. The
Andamanese do not trap either birds or animals, though some of the
birds, particularly the rail, might be very easily caught in traps.

As the hunting party traverses the forest they may come across roots or
fruits or seeds, or wild honey, and these are collected and carried
home. In the rainy season only small combs of black honey are to be
found [28], and these are generally consumed by the hunters on the
spot.

The provision of the vegetable food of the community is the work of the
women, who must also supply the camp with firewood and water. While the
men are away hunting the women, attended by the children, cut and carry
the firewood, and either remain in the camp making baskets or nets or
other objects, or else go into the forest to look for fruits and seeds.
Thus by midday the camp may be quite deserted, save perhaps for one or
two old men and women, and a few of the children.

In the afternoon the women return with what food they have obtained and
then the men come in with their provision. The camp, unless the hunters
have been unsuccessful, is then busy with the preparation of the
evening meal, which is the chief meal of the day. If a pig has been
brought home whole it is cooked at the public cooking place and is then
cut up. The meat is distributed amongst the members of the community
and the woman of each family then proceeds to cook the family meal. The
pork, after it has been roasted and cut up, is further cooked by being
boiled. The family meal is prepared at the fire that each family has in
its hut. The meal is a family one, partaken by a man and his wife and
children. The bachelors cook and eat their own meal, and the unmarried
women also eat by themselves.

After the meal is over, darkness having by this time fallen, the men
may spend an hour or two in dancing to the accompaniment of a song sung
by one of them with the help of a chorus of women. In that case they
would probably eat another meal after the dance was over. Another
favourite amusement for the evening is what may be called “yarning.” A
man sits down with a few listeners and tells them, with few words, and
with many dramatic gestures, how he killed a pig. The same man may go
on with tale after tale, till, by the time he finishes he has killed
twenty or thirty pigs. Finally the whole camp retires to rest and
nothing is to be seen but the dim light of the little fires burning in
each hut or in each of the family quarters.

On a day when there is plenty of food left from the day before, or on a
day of stormy weather even when food is not too plentiful, the men may
remain in camp instead of going hunting. They busy themselves with
making weapons and implements, such as bows, arrows, adzes, etc.

On occasions when game is not very plentiful a party of hunters may
stay away from the camp for a few days, not returning till they have
been successful in obtaining a fair supply of food. The women and
children and old men, with perhaps a few of the able bodied men also,
remain at home and provide for themselves as well as they can, the
women devoting their time to collecting what vegetable foods are in
season.

At the end of the rainy season there comes a brief period of unsettled
weather, called by the natives of the North Andaman Kimil, and by those
of the South, Gumul. During this season some of the vegetable foods
begin to be available, though not in any quantities. At this time of
the year the natives are able to obtain and feast upon what they regard
as great delicacies, the larvae of the cicada and of the great
capricornis beetle. The cool season, when fruits and roots are
plentiful, begins at the end of November. The forest dwellers leave
their main encampment during this season. Some of them go off to pay
visits to their friends of other local groups. Such visits may last two
or three months. Those who remain occupy temporary camps in convenient
places. The men join the women in looking for roots and fruits, and do
not spend so much of their time in hunting. Some of the men visit the
main camp at intervals of a few days to see that it is all right. As
the cool season gives way to the hot season (March to May) honey begins
to be plentiful. At that time hunting for pig is almost abandoned. The
pigs are in poor condition, and even when one is killed it is often
left in the jungle by the natives as not being good enough to eat. On
the other hand everyone is busy collecting honey. This is work in which
both men and women join, though it is the men who climb up the trees
and cut down the honeycomb. The natives have no means of keeping the
honey for more than a very short time, as it rapidly ferments. While it
is plentiful they almost live on it, supplementing it with roots and
fruits and with fish, if they are near a creek. Towards the end of the
hot season the fruit of the Artocarpus chaplasha, which is a favourite
food of the natives, becomes ripe. The men and women, at this time,
spend much of their time collecting the fruit. When it is collected the
fruit is broken open and each of the seeds is sucked to obtain the
juicy pulp or aril with which it is surrounded, and which has a very
pleasant taste. The seeds are then partly boiled and are buried in the
ground to remain there for a few weeks, when they will be dug up again
and cooked and eaten. Any natives who may have been away from home on a
visit, return before the Artocarpus comes into fruit in order to take
their share in collecting it and providing a supply of the seeds for
consumption in the rainy season. The natives then return to the
headquarters camp and make any necessary repairs to the hut in
preparation for the rainy season, which begins about the middle of May.

The coast-dwellers are not quite so much influenced by the seasons as
the forest-dwellers. They can fish and collect molluscs all the year
round. In the rainy season they divide their time between hunting pig
in the forest and fishing or turtle hunting. They do not need, however,
to remain at the same camp during the whole of the rainy season, but
after a month or two at one place can move to what they hope to find
better hunting grounds. During the cool and hot seasons they pay visits
to one another. In the fine weather the men often go off on
turtle-hunting expeditions for several days, leaving the women and
children and older men in the village, where they provide for
themselves with vegetable food and with fish and molluscs from the
reefs.

It is during the fine weather that there take place the meetings of two
or more local groups that are an important feature of the social life
of the Andaman Islanders. These meetings will be described later in the
present chapter.

Besides their food, which they must find from day to day, the natives
have need of nothing save their weapons and implements. Of these each
person makes his own, each man making his own bow, arrows, adze, etc.,
while the wife makes her baskets, nets and so on.

The economic life of the local group, though in effect it approaches to
a sort of communism, is yet based on the notion of private property.
Land is the only thing that is owned in common. The hunting grounds of
a local group belong to the whole group, and all the members have an
equal right to hunt over any part of it. There exists, however, a
certain private ownership of trees. A man of one of the local groups of
the coast may notice in the jungle a tree suitable for a canoe. He will
tell the others that he has noticed such a tree, describing it and its
whereabouts. Thenceforward that tree is regarded as his property, and
even if some years should elapse, and he has made no use of it, yet
another man would not cut it down without first asking the owner to
give him the tree. In a similar way certain men claim to possess
certain Artocarpus trees, though how the ownership in these cases had
arisen I was unable to determine. No one would pick the fruit off such
a tree without the permission of the owner, and having received
permission and gathered the fruit he would give some part of it to the
owner of the tree.

A pig belongs to the man whose arrow first strikes it, though if the
arrow merely glanced off and did not remain in the wound it would not
give any claim to ownership. A turtle or a dugong or big fish belongs
to the man who throws the harpoon with which it is taken. A honeycomb
belongs to the man who climbs the tree and cuts it down. The fish that
a man shoots belong to him, and to a woman belong the roots she digs
up, the seeds that she collects, the fish or prawns that she takes in
her net or the molluscs that she brings from the reefs. Any weapon that
a man makes belongs to him alone to do what he pleases with, and
anything that a woman makes is her own property. A man is not free to
dispose of the personal property of his wife without her permission.

In the village each family erects and keeps in repair its own hut, and
the wife provides the hut with the firewood and water needed. In the
case of a communal hut it would seem that this is really an example of
a possession common to the whole group. This is so, however, only in
appearance. The hut is built by all the different families, but each
family is regarded as owning a certain portion of the hut when it is
finished, and it is the family that keeps this part of the hut in
repair.

A canoe is cut by a number of men together. From the outset, however,
it is the property of one man, who selects the tree and superintends
the operation of cutting it into shape. He is always one of the older
men, and he enlists the services of the younger men to help him. When
finished the canoe is his property, and he can do with it what he
pleases, giving it away, if he wishes, and no one has any share of
ownership in a canoe on the ground that he helped to make it.

While all portable property is thus owned by individuals, the
Andamanese have customs which result in an approach to communism. One
of these is the custom of constantly exchanging presents with one
another. When two friends meet who have not seen each other for some
time, one of the first things they do is to exchange presents with one
another. Even in the ordinary everyday life of the village there is a
constant giving and receiving of presents. A younger man or woman may
give some article to an older one without expecting or receiving any
return, but between equals a person who gives a present always expects
that he will receive something of equal value in exchange. At the
meetings that take place between neighbouring local groups the exchange
of presents is of great importance. Each of the visitors brings with
him a number of articles that he distributes amongst the members of the
group that he visits. When the visitors depart they are loaded with
presents received from their hosts. It requires a good deal of tact on
the part of everyone concerned to avoid the unpleasantness that may
arise if a man thinks that he has not received things as valuable as he
has given, or if he fancies that he has not received quite the same
amount of attention as has been accorded to others.

It is considered a breach of good manners ever to refuse the request of
another. Thus if a man be asked by another to give him anything that he
may possess, he will immediately do so. If the two men are equals a
return of about the same value will have to be made. As between an
older married man and a bachelor or a young married man, however, the
younger would not make any request of such a nature, and if the older
man asked the younger for anything the latter would give it without
always expecting a return.

Almost every object that the Andamanese possess is thus constantly
changing hands. Even canoes may be given away, but it is more usual for
these to be lent by the owner to his friends.

It has been stated above that all food is private property and belongs
to the man or woman who has obtained it. Every one who has food is
expected, however, to give to those who have none. An older married man
will reserve for himself sufficient for his family, and will then give
the rest to his friends. A younger man is expected to give away the
best of what he gets to the older men. This is particularly the case
with the bachelors. Should a young unmarried man kill a pig he must be
content to see it distributed by one of the older men, all the best
parts going to the seniors, while he and his companions must be
satisfied with the inferior parts. The result of these customs is that
practically all the food obtained is evenly distributed through the
whole camp, the only inequality being that the younger men do not fare
so well as their elders. Generosity is esteemed by the Andaman
Islanders one of the highest of virtues and is unremittingly practised
by the majority of them.

Within the local group there is no such thing as a division of labour
save as between the two sexes. In the coastal groups every man is
expected to be able to hunt pig, to harpoon turtle and to catch fish,
and also to cut a canoe, to make bows and arrows and all the other
objects that are made by men. It happens that some men are more skilful
in certain pursuits than in others. A skilful turtle-hunter, for
example, may be an indifferent pig-hunter, and such a man will
naturally prefer to devote himself to the pursuit in which he appears
to most advantage.

The division of labour between the sexes is fairly clearly marked. A
man hunts and fishes, using the bow and arrow and the harpoon; he makes
his own bows and arrows, his adze and knife, cuts canoes and makes rope
for harpoon lines. A woman collects fruits and digs up roots with her
digging stick; she catches prawns and crabs and small fish with her
small fishing net; she provides the firewood and the water of the
family and does the cooking (i.e. the family cooking, but not the
common cooking, which is entirely done by men); she makes all such
objects as baskets, nets of thread, and personal ornaments either for
herself or her husband.

There is no organised government in an Andamanese village. The affairs
of the community are regulated entirely by the older men and women. The
younger members of the community are brought up to pay respect to their
elders and to submit to them in many ways. It has already been shown
how, in the distribution of food, the elders get the best share. When
it is a question of shifting camp to some better hunting ground the
opinion of the older men would weigh against that of the younger if
they disagreed. It must not be thought, however, that the older men are
tyrannical or selfish. I only once heard a young man complain of the
older men getting so much the best of everything. The respect for
seniority is kept alive partly by tradition and partly by the fact that
the older men have had a greater experience than the younger. It could
probably not be maintained if it regularly gave rise to any tyrannical
treatment of the younger by the elder.

The respect for seniors is shown in the existence of special terms of
address which men and women use when speaking to their elders. In the
languages of the North Andaman there are two such terms, Mai or Maia,
applied to men, with a meaning equivalent to “Sir,” and Mimi, applied
to women. These words may be used either alone or prefixed to the
personal name of the person addressed. A younger man speaking to an
older one whose name was Bora would address him either as Mai (Sir), or
as Maia Bora (Sir Bora).

In the tribes of the South Andaman there are exactly similar terms. In
the Aka-Bea tribe Maia or Maiola is used in addressing men and Čana or
Čanola in speaking to women. In Akar-Bale the equivalent terms are Da
and In. Besides these terms there is in these tribes another, Mam, Mama
or Mamola, which may be used in speaking to either men or women, and
which implies a higher degree of respect than Maia or Čana. In these
tribes also there is a special way of showing respect by adding the
suffix -la to the name of the person addressed, as Bia, Biala, Woičo,
Woičo-la, etc.

In the legends of the Andamanese these titles are nearly always
prefixed to the names of the legendary ancestors, as Maia J̌utpu and
Mimi Biliku in Aka-J̌eru, or Da Duku and In Bain in Akar-Bale. The moon
is similarly spoken of as Sir Moon (Maia Ogar in Aka-Bea) and the sun
as Lady Sun (Čana Bodo).

Besides the respect for seniority there is another important factor in
the regulation of the social life, namely the respect for certain
personal qualities. These qualities are skill in hunting and in
warfare, generosity and kindness, and freedom from bad temper. A man
possessing them inevitably acquires a position of influence in the
community. His opinion on any subject carries more weight than that of
another even older man. The younger men attach themselves to him, are
anxious to please him by giving him any presents that they can, or by
helping him in such work as cutting a canoe, and to join him in hunting
parties or turtle expeditions. In each local group there was usually to
be found one man who thus by his influence could control and direct
others. Amongst the chief men of several friendly local groups it would
generally happen that one of them, by reason of his personal qualities,
would attain to a position of higher rank than the others. Younger men
would be desirous of joining the local group to which he belonged. He
would find himself popular and respected at the annual meetings of the
different groups, and his influence would thus spread beyond the narrow
limits of his own small community.

There was no special word to denote such men and distinguish them from
others. In the languages of the North Andaman they were spoken of as
er-kuro = “big.”

Such men might perhaps be spoken of as “chiefs,” but the term is
somewhat misleading, as it makes us think of the organised
chieftainship of other savage races.

The above statement is not quite in agreement with what has been
written by Mr Man on the same subject, and what he says is therefore
reproduced here. “Their domestic policy may be described as a communism
modified by the authority, more or less nominal, of the chief. The head
chief of a tribe is called maia igla, and the elders, or sub-chiefs,
i.e. those in authority over each community, consisting of from 20 to
50 individuals, maiola. The head chief, who usually resides at a
permanent encampment, has authority over all the sub-chiefs, but his
power, like theirs, is very limited. It is exercised mainly in
organising meetings between the various communities belonging to his
tribe, and in exerting influence in all questions affecting the welfare
of his followers. It is the chief alone, as may be supposed, who
directs the movements of a party while on hunting and fishing
expeditions, or when migrating. It is usually through his intervention
that disputes are settled, but he possesses no power to punish or
enforce obedience to his wishes, it being left to all alike to take the
law into their own hands when aggrieved. The aryoto and eremtaga in
each tribe have their own head chief, who are independent the one of
the other. As might be assumed from the results of observations made of
other savage races, whose sole or chief occupation consists in hunting
or fishing, the power of the chiefs is very limited, and not
necessarily hereditary, though, in the event of a grown-up son being
left who was qualified for the post, he would, in most instances, be
selected to succeed his father in preference to any other individual of
equal efficiency. At the death of a chief there is no difficulty in
appointing a successor, there being always at least one who is
considered his deputy or right-hand man. As they are usually, on these
occasions, unanimous in their choice, no formal election takes place;
however, should any be found to dissent, the question is decided by the
wishes of the majority, it being always open to malcontents to transfer
their allegiance to another chief, since there is no such thing as
forced submission to the authority of one who is not a general
favourite. Social status being dependent not merely on the accident of
relationship, but on skill in hunting, fishing, etc., and on a
reputation for generosity and hospitality, the chiefs and elders are
almost invariably superior in every respect to the rest. They and their
wives are at liberty to enjoy immunity from the drudgery incidental to
their mode of life, all such acts being voluntarily performed for them
by the young unmarried persons living under their headship [29].”

Where Mr Man speaks of the “authority” of the chiefs it would be better
to speak of “influence.” Of authority the leading men have little or
none, but of influence they have a good deal. Should any one venture to
oppose a popular chief he would find the majority of the natives,
including many of his friends, siding against him. The words “chief”
and “authority” seem to imply some sort of organised rule and
procedure, and of this there is nothing in the Andamans. Mr Man also
implies that in each tribe there is always one recognized headman, but
in reality each tribe may possess two or three leading men in different
parts of the country, each with his own following. In any case a man’s
influence is largely confined to his own local group, for it is only at
the annual meetings that the men of other groups come in contact with
him.

The early officers of the Andamanese Homes (before the time of Mr Man)
established a system of chieftainship in the islands by selecting a few
of the more trustworthy and intelligent men, whom they dignified with
the title of raja, and who acted as the intermediaries between the
Officer in Charge of the Andamanese and the natives. This system has
been continued to the present day, and the natives have adopted the
title raja for these men, having themselves no word for a chief. Where
a man is selected who is already respected and esteemed by the natives
his influence is considerably increased through the position thus
assigned to him. The natives themselves do not recognize that he has
any authority over them, but if he be a man of generosity and tact, the
majority will always support him, and his advice in any matters of
moment will be readily followed.

Women may occupy a position of influence similar to that of the men.
The wife of a leading man generally exercises the same sort of
influence over the women as her husband does over the men. A woman,
however, would not exercise any influence over the men in matters
connected with hunting. They do have a good deal of influence in
connection with quarrels either of individuals or of local groups.

There are certain men, and possibly sometimes women, who have an
influence over their fellows owing to their being credited with the
possession of supernatural powers. These men, called in Aka-J̌eru
oko-ǰumu (literally “one who speaks from dreams”), will be described in
a later chapter. As they are believed to have command over the powers
that produce and cure sickness everyone tries to be on good terms with
them, avoiding giving them offence in any way, and seeking their favour
by presents of food or other things. It sometimes happens that a chief
(the leading man of a local group) is at the same time a medicine-man
or oko-ǰumu, but the two positions are entirely distinct and separate,
and a man may be a medicine-man who possesses none of the qualities
that are necessary for a head man.

There does not appear to have been in the Andamans any such thing as
the punishment of crime. We may distinguish two kinds of anti-social
actions which are regarded by the natives as being wrong. The first
kind are those actions which injure in some way a private individual.
The second are those, which, while they do not injure any particular
person, are yet regarded with disapproval by the society in general.

Amongst the anti-social actions of the first kind are murder, or
wounding, theft and adultery, and wilful damage of the property of
another.

No case of one Andamanese killing another has occurred in recent years.
Quarrels sometimes occur between two men of the same camp. A good deal
of hard swearing goes on, and sometimes one of the men will work
himself up to a high pitch of anger, in which he may seize his bow and
discharge an arrow near to the one who has offended him, or may vent
his ill-temper by destroying any property that he can lay his hands on,
including not only that of his enemy but also that of other persons and
even his own. At such a display of anger the women and children flee
into the jungle in terror, and if the angry man be at all a formidable
person the men occasionally do the same. It apparently requires more
courage than the natives usually possess to endeavour to allay such a
storm of anger. Yet I found that the slightest show of authority would
immediately bring such a scene to an end. A man of influence in his
village was probably generally equal to the task of keeping order and
preventing any serious damage from taking place. It was probably rare
for a man so far to give way to his anger as to kill his opponent.

Such murders did, however, occasionally take place [30]. The murderer
would, as a rule, leave the camp and hide himself in the jungle, where
he might be joined by such of his friends as were ready to take his
part. It was left to the relatives and friends of the dead man to exact
vengeance if they wished and if they could. If the murderer was a man
who was much feared it is probable that he would escape. In any case
the anger of the Andamanese is short-lived, and if for a few months he
could keep out of the way of those who might seek revenge, it is
probable that at the end of that time he would find their anger cooled.

A man who is liable to outbursts of violent anger is feared by his
fellows, and unless he has other counterbalancing qualities, he is
never likely to become popular. He is treated with outward respect, for
every one is afraid of offending him, but he never acquires the esteem
of others. There is a special nickname, Tarenǰek, in the North Andaman,
to denote such a man [31].

Quarrels were more likely to occur at the meetings of different local
groups that took place in the fine weather, and such quarrels might
occasionally end in the murder of some one. In such a case the quarrel
would be taken up by the group of the murdered man, and a feud would be
set up between them and the local group to which the murderer belonged.
Such was one of the common causes of origin of the petty warfare that
formerly existed in the Andamans, which will be referred to later in
the present chapter.

Cases of theft seem to have been rare. It was left to the aggrieved
person to take vengeance upon the thief, but if he killed him or
seriously wounded him he would have to expect the possible vengeance of
the relatives and friends. Adultery was regarded as a form of theft. I
gathered that a man had the right to punish his wife for
unfaithfulness, but if the punishment were too severe it would be an
occasion for a quarrel with her relatives. It was difficult for the
aggrieved husband to punish the man who had offended against him. If he
killed him he would lay himself open to the revenge of the relatives.
The most he could do was to vent his anger in violent words.

Women also occasionally quarrel with one another and swear forcibly at
one another, or even get so far as to destroy one another’s belongings,
or to fight with their fists or sticks. The men hesitate to interfere,
and the quarrel can only be stopped by some woman of influence.

The frequent occurrence of serious quarrels is prevented both by the
influence of the older men and by the fear that everyone has of the
possible vengeance of others should he in any way offend them.

There are a number of actions which, while they do not offend any
particular person, are regarded as being anti-social. One of these is
laziness. Every man is expected to take his proper share in providing
both himself and others with food. Should a man shirk this obligation,
nothing would be said to him, unless he were a young unmarried man, and
he would still be given food by others, but he would find himself
occupying a position of inferiority in the camp, and would entirely
lose the esteem of his fellows. Other qualities or actions that result
in a similar loss of esteem are marital unfaithfulness, lack of respect
to others and particularly to elders, meanness or niggardliness, and
bad temper. One man was mentioned to me as being a bad man because he
refused to take a wife after he had reached the age when it is
considered proper for a man to marry. In recent times at least one
young man has refused to undergo the privations connected with the
initiation ceremonies. This was of course a case of gross rebellion
against the customs of the tribe, but there was no way of punishing him
or of compelling him to conform, save by showing him that he was an
object of contempt and ridicule to others. Probably such a refusal to
conform to tribal customs could not have taken place before the British
occupation of the islands.

Another class of wrong actions consists in the breaking of ritual
prohibitions. There are, for example, as will be shown in a later
chapter, a number of actions which it is believed may cause bad
weather, such as burning bees’-wax or killing a cicada. There is,
however, no punishment that can be meted out to any one who does any of
these things. The punishment, if we may call it so, is a purely
supernatural one, and it strikes not only the offender but every one
else as well. In the legends of the Andamanese there are one or two
stories related of how one of the ancestors, being angry, deliberately
performed one of the forbidden actions and thus brought a storm that
destroyed many human beings [32]. There are other ritual prohibitions
the non-observance of which is supposed to bring its own punishment on
the offender, who, it is believed, will be ill.

The medicine-men (oko-ǰumu) are credited with the power to work evil
magic, and by its means to make other people ill, and even to kill
them. A man suspected of evil magic might be liable to the vengeance of
those who thought that they had been injured by him, but though the
practice was regarded as reprehensible it does not seem that the
society ever acted as a whole to punish a man suspected of it.

Children are reproved for improper behaviour, but they are never
punished. During their years of infancy they are much spoilt, not only
by their parents but by every one. During the period of adolescence
every boy and girl has to undergo a somewhat severe discipline, to be
described in a later chapter. This probation, if it may be so called,
is enforced by a unanimous public opinion. The discipline lasts until
the man or woman is married and a parent, or if childless as so many
now are, until he or she has settled down to a position of
responsibility.

Thus, though the Andaman Islanders had a well developed social
conscience, that is, a system of moral notions as to what is right and
wrong, there was no such thing as the punishment of a crime by the
society. If one person injured another it was left to the injured one
to seek vengeance if he wished and if he dared. There were probably
always some who would side with the criminal, their attachment to him
overcoming their disapproval of his actions. The only painful result of
anti-social actions was the loss of the esteem of others. This in
itself was a punishment that the Andamanese, with their great personal
vanity, would feel keenly, and it was in most instances sufficient to
prevent such actions. For the rest, good order depended largely on the
influence of the more prominent men and women.

We have so far considered only the general regulation of conduct in the
local group, without giving any attention to the more special
regulations dependent on relationships by blood and by marriage. In all
human societies there is a system of rights and duties regulating the
conduct towards one another of persons who are related either by
consanguinity or through marriage. In primitive societies these
particular rights and duties occupy a position of preponderating
importance, owing, no doubt, to the small number of persons with whom
any single person comes into effective social contact. When a large
proportion of the men and women with whom any person comes in contact
are related to him, it is clear that relationship must count for a good
deal in regulating the everyday life of the people.

Different societies have different systems of relationship. This means,
not only that they attach different duties to particular relations, but
also that they have different ways of reckoning the relationships
themselves. The vast majority of primitive peoples have some one or
other form of what is known to ethnologists as the “classificatory
system of relationship [33].” This system is intimately connected with
the existence of the social divisions known as “clans.” In the Andamans
there are no clans, and the system of relationship is fundamentally
different from all the classificatory systems.

To understand the Andamanese system it is necessary to examine the
terms by which they denote the different kinds of relationship which
are recognized [34]. In many societies having the classificatory system
of relationship the terms which are used to denote relationship are
also used as terms of address, just as we use the terms “Father” and
“Mother.” In the Andamans this is not so. There are special words that
are used as terms of address, but these do not imply any relationship
between the speaker and the person spoken to. In the North Andaman
those terms are Maia (= Sir) and Mimi (= Lady). These are used by
younger men and women in speaking to older persons. For the rest,
persons are addressed freely by their personal names. There are no
terms of address that imply any relationship of consanguinity between
the person speaking and the person whom he addresses. This is an
important feature of the Andamanese system, distinguishing it from the
systems of many other primitive societies.

The following is a list of terms used to denote relationship in the
North Andaman. There seems to be very little difference in this matter
between the four tribes of the North (Aka-Čari, Aka-Ko̱ra, Aka-Bo and
Aka-J̌eru).


              aka-mai              his father
              aka-mimi             his mother
              ot-tire              his child
              ot-otoatue           his older brother
              ot-otoatue-čip       his older sister
              ot-arai-čulute       his younger brother
              ot-arai-čulute-čip   his younger sister
              ot-e-bui or e-bui    his wife (her husband)
              e-pota-čiu           his father-in-law
              e-pota-čip           his mother-in-law
              ot-otone             his son-in-law.


Aka-mai and aka-mimi. The words for “father” and “mother” are derived
from the terms of address Maia and Mimi by the addition in each case of
the prefix aka-. By itself the term Maia is used by any man or woman in
speaking to a man older than himself or herself without implying any
relation between them beyond that of respective age. The addition of
the prefix aka- changes the word, giving it the meaning “the father of
somebody.” Thus Maia Bora means “Mr Bora” or “Sir Bora,” if we may so
translate it, but Bora aka-mai means “Bora’s father,” and aka-mai Bora
means “his or her father Bora.” The Aka-J̌eru equivalent for “my father”
is t’a-mai, the t’ being the personal pronoun “my,” after which the
prefix aka- is contracted to a-. Similarly “thy father” is ŋ’a-mai and
“their father” or “their fathers” is n’a-mai. The word aka-mimi is in
every respect exactly parallel to aka-mai. These two terms are only
used when it is necessary to refer to the actual father or mother of
anybody. For example, if a man be asked Ačiu ŋ’a-mai bi? (Who your
father is?), he will reply by giving the name of his own father.

The stem maia clearly relates to the social position of the father of a
family. A man who is a father, or while not having any children, is
married and occupies an equivalent social position to a father, is
addressed by the term which shows his social position, Maia. When I
call a man Maia, I do not imply that he is my father nor that he is
related to me at all, but only that he is a father. On the other hand,
the prefix aka- added to the stem makes a possessive form, so that
aka-mai means “his father” and t’a-mai means “my father.” The word mimi
is exactly parallel. By itself, the stem simply shows that the person
addressed is a mother, while aka-mimi means “his mother.”

Ot-tire. The word “child,” when there is no reference to the child of
some particular person, is translated e-tire, -tire being the stem and
e- the prefix [35]. With a change of prefix from e- to ot-, a
possessive form is made, so that ot-tire always means “his or her
child,” with reference to some particular person understood. Thus Bora
ot-tire would mean “the child of Bora,” while Bora e-tire or e-tire
Bora would mean “the child Bora.” The phrase t’ot-tire (my child) is
used by either a man or a woman to denote his or her child.

Ot-otoatue and ot-arai-čulute. I was unable to find in the languages of
the North Andaman any words which could properly be translated
“brother” or “sister.” The two words here given are used by the
Andamanese to denote persons older or younger than the speaker, whether
they be brothers and sisters or not. The derivation of ot-otoatue could
not be ascertained, but the word means “he who was born before me,” and
it is used in this sense to denote any person of the speaker’s
generation who is older than himself. If it is necessary to emphasise
the female sex of the person spoken of, the suffix -čip is added. An
alternative word of exactly the same meaning is ot-areupu (fem.
ot-arep-čip). The word ot-arai-čulute is formed from the stem čulu or
čulutu meaning “following” or “after,” which always takes the prefix
arai-. (This prefix conveys a reference to position in time or space.)
The stem is found in such phrases as tio ŋ’arai-čulutu-bom, “I will
follow you” (literally tio = I, ŋ’ = thou, čulutu = after, and -bom,
verbal suffix), and tarai-čulik “afterwards” (t-arai-čulu-ik). The
prefix ot- added in front of the usual prefix arai- determines the
particular use of the word as referring to human beings. Thus the word
ot-arai-čulute means, literally, “he or she who was born after me.” It
is used in this sense by a man or woman to denote any person of the
same generation who is younger than himself. The suffix -čip may be
added to denote a female. Alternative words of the same meaning are
ot-ara-liču and ot-ara-bela.

These words are not, properly speaking, terms of relationship, but
serve only to denote the respective ages of two persons. I did not
discover any terms whatever by which a man can distinguish his own
brother or sister from any other man or woman of the same age.

Ot-e-bui. The stem -bui means “to marry,” as in n’ e-bui-om = they are
married. “My husband” or “my wife” is simply t’e-bui or t’ot-e-bui.

E-pota-čiu and e-pota-čip. The derivation of these words was not
discovered. They are the terms by which a man distinguishes his wife’s
father and mother, and a woman her husband’s father and mother.

Ot-otone. The word and its meaning are somewhat doubtful. It was
sometimes used by a man to denote his daughter’s husband, and perhaps
also his son’s wife. I once heard it applied to a younger sister’s
husband. It may be compared with the same word as used in the South
Andaman to be mentioned presently.

So far as could be discovered, there are no words in the languages of
the North Andaman for grandfather, grandmother, uncle, aunt, cousin,
etc. The terms given above can be combined to describe relatives of
this kind, as


        T’a-mimi aka-mai            my mother’s father
        Ot-e-bui ot-arai-čulute     his wife’s younger brother
        Ŋ’ot-a-mai ot-arai-čulute   thy father’s younger brother
        T’ot-otoatue ot-tire        my older brother’s child.


These compound terms are not often used, however.

The terms of relationship of the Akar-Bale tribe may be taken as
representative of the tribes of the South Andaman. The following list
contains all the more important of them.


           da            father
           ab-atr        father
           in            mother
           ar-bua        child
           ar-kodire     child (father speaking)
           ab-atet       child (mother speaking)
           mama          grandparent
           ǰat           grandchild
           en-toaka-ŋa   older brother or sister
           ar-dotot      younger brother or sister
           otoni         son-in-law
           oten          daughter-in-law
           ab-i-ŋa       consort (husband or wife)
           aka-yat       parent of child’s consort
           aka-bua       consort’s younger brother or sister
           ep-taruo-ŋa   step relative
           ot-čat-ŋa     relative by adoption
           aka-kuam      younger relative
           ab-čuga       older relative (male)
           ab-čupal      older relative (female).


Da and in. Da is the common term of address used when speaking to an
older man to whom the speaker wishes to show respect. A man will speak
of his own father as dege da, dege being the personal pronoun “my” as
used before a word that has no prefix. The term In is the common term
of address used in speaking to women. A man or woman will refer to his
or her own mother as deg’ in. The use of these two terms as applied to
parents is very similar to the use of aka-mai and aka-mimi in the North
Andaman, with the difference that in Akar-Bale the stem da or in does
not take a prefix to modify its meaning. While the use of the terms Da
and In as terms of address does not in the least imply that there is
any relationship between the person speaking and the person addressed,
yet the phrase dege da would in general be understood as referring to
the speaker’s own father.

Ab-atr. This is a word descriptive of the relationship of a father to
his child. I never heard a man refer to his own father by this term,
but it is heard in such phrases as deg’ in l’ab-atr = my mother’s
father. It conveys a definite notion of the physiological relation
between a father and his children, and might be translated “he who
caused me to be conceived.” There is probably a feminine equivalent
meaning “mother,” but it was not noted.

Ar-bua, ar-kodire and ab-atet. The Akar-Bale word for “infant” is
ab-liga or ab-dareka. The latter word is the phonetic equivalent of the
e-tire of the Northern languages. A parent often speaks of his or her
infant son as d’ab-bula, and of his infant daughter as d’ab-pal,
ab-bula and ab-pal being the terms for “male” and “female [36].” The
exact use of the term ar-bua is difficult to determine. The stem -bua
may be used by itself without a prefix. Dege bua (my child) would
refer, I believe, only to the child of the speaker. On the other hand,
a man would use the term d’ar-bua as referring not only to his own
child but also to the child of a brother or a sister, or even to a
person who was not related to him at all. So far as it could be
determined, it seems that a man or woman might apply this term (ar-bua)
to any person of the same generation as his or her children, whether a
relative or not. It thus means “a person of the same generation as my
own children,” and describes, not relationship, but respective age. The
word ar-kodire refers to the own child of a man, and ab-atet similarly
refers to the own child of a woman. The two words together are thus
equivalent to the ot-tire of the North Andaman, the Akar-Bale
distinguishing between the offspring of a man (ar-kodire) and the
offspring of a woman (ab-atet).

Mama. The word is translated above as meaning “grandparent,” but it has
a wider meaning than this. It is used as a term of address to convey
more respect than is conveyed by the terms Da and In, and is thus used
in addressing any man or woman who is considerably older than the
speaker. With the personal pronoun, dege mama, it may be applied by a
man or woman to any of his grandparents, and also to his father-in-law
and mother-in-law, and to other senior relatives.

J̌at. The word was explained to me by the natives as meaning
“grandchild.” It seems to be a sort of reciprocal of mama, and is
apparently applicable by any old man or woman to any child of the same
generation as his or her own grandchildren.

En-toaka-ŋa and ar-dotot. These two words are used in exactly the same
way as the words ot-otoatue and ot-arai-čulute of the North Andaman.
They are not properly terms of relationship, but may be equally used in
referring to non-relatives. En-toaka-ŋa means “he who was born before
me,” and ar-dotot means “he who was born after me.” I was not able to
discover any word by which a person could distinguish his own brother
or sister from others of the same age. It is not certain, however, that
such a word does not exist.

Otoni and oten. These are masculine and feminine forms of the same
word, and are used to denote a daughter’s husband and a son’s wife.
Otoni is also applied to a younger sister’s husband, and oten to a
younger brother’s wife. The derivation of the words was not discovered.

Aka-yat. This is the native name for the relationship subsisting
between a person’s parents and his parents-in-law. My own mother or
father is aka-yat to my wife’s father or mother.

Aka-bua. The word is derived from the stem bua, meaning “child.” It is
applied by a man to the younger brothers and sisters of his wife, and
by a woman to the younger brothers and sisters of her husband.

Ab-i-ŋa. The word is translated “consort,” and means either husband or
wife. It is derived from the verbal stem -i- meaning “to marry”
(on-i-re), ab- being the prefix, and -ŋa the verbal suffix.

Ep-taruo-ŋa. The word is used to denote a step-child, or a younger
step-brother or sister.

Ot-čat-ŋa. The word means “adopted.” “My adopted child” is simply
expressed as d’ot-čat-ŋa, while “my foster father” is dege da
ot-čat-ŋa. The stem is -čat-, -ŋa being the verbal suffix and ot- the
prefix.

Aka-kuam. In spite of several enquiries, I was unable to ascertain the
significance of this word. I heard it applied on different occasions to
a younger brother or sister, to a younger first cousin, and to the
brothers and sisters of a wife. The only suitable translation would
seem to be “my younger relative,” but it is not certain that it even
implies any relationship at all. It is perhaps really a term denoting
respective social status and is used by a married man to denote other
married men who are somewhat younger than himself, and with whom he is
on friendly terms.

Ab-čuga and ab-čupal. These are the masculine and feminine forms of one
word. Mr Portman [37] gives them as meaning “married man” and “married
woman.” I heard them used, however, with the personal pronoun. Thus a
man applied the term ab-čuga to his older brother, his older sister’s
husband, and to his father’s brother. In this usage these two terms
seem to be in a sense reciprocal to aka-kuam. A younger married man
will refer to older married men and women as his ab-čuga and ab-čupal,
while they will call him aka-kuam.

In his work on the Andamanese, Mr E. H. Man gives a long list of terms
of relationship for the Aka-Bea tribe [38]. It will be of some interest
to compare the terms there given with those of the Akar-Bale tribe
described above.

D’ab-maiola (D’ab-mai-ola). This is translated by Mr Man as “father.”
In Aka-Bea the term Maia is the term of address corresponding to the Da
of Akar-Bale and to the Mai of the North Andaman. The suffix -ola,
added to this and other terms of address serves to convey additional
respect, as Maia, Mai-ola, Čana, Čan-ola, Mama, Mam-ola. Thus
ab-mai-ola corresponds to the aka-mai of the Northern languages.

Dia Maia. This is given by Mr Man as applicable to the following
relatives:—my father’s brother, my mother’s brother, my father’s
sister’s husband, my mother’s sister’s husband, my father’s father’s
brother’s (or sister’s) son, my husband’s grandfather, my wife’s
grandfather, my wife’s sister’s husband (if elder), my husband’s
sister’s husband (if elder).

Dia maiola. My grandfather, my grandfather’s brother, my grandmother’s
brother, my elder sister’s husband.

It must be remembered that these terms are not properly terms of
relationship at all. Any man who is older than the speaker is Maia or
Mai-ola to him, the latter implying a slightly higher degree of respect
than the former. It is probable that the three different terms given
above are not used by the natives with the very precise distinctions
that are drawn by Mr Man. It may be noted that Mr Portman writes in
this connection:—”Maia is an Honorific, equivalent to the English
‘Sir,’ and is used when addressing a male elder. A son calls his father
‘Sir,’ and uses no other word in speaking to, or of, him. A pronoun
                                 Dia maiola [39].”
emphasises the relationship, as: My Father

D’ ab-čanola. Given by Mr Man as meaning “my mother.” It is the
feminine equivalent of d’ ab-mai-ola, Čana being the feminine of Maia,
and corresponding to the In of Akar-Bale and the Mimi of Aka-J̌eru.

Dia čanola. This is given as the Aka-Bea translation of the
following:—my father’s sister, my mother’s sister, my father’s
brother’s wife, my mother’s brother’s wife, my grandmother, my great
aunt, my father’s father’s sister’s daughter, my mother’s mother’s
sister’s daughter, my husband’s grandmother, my wife’s grandmother, my
husband’s sister (if senior and a mother), my elder brother’s wife (if
a mother). In its formation the term is the feminine equivalent of dia
mai-ola, while in its use it is the equivalent both of this term and of
dia maia. This serves to show that there is no real precise distinction
between dia maia and dia mai-ola, such as Mr Man’s list would seem to
imply. Dia čan-ola is not, properly speaking, a term of relationship.
Any married woman senior to the speaker is entitled to be addressed as
Čana or Čan-ola.

D’ ab-čabil. Mr Man gives this as translating “my father, my
step-father.” The feminine equivalent would seem to be d’ ab-čanola,
which is given for “my mother” and “my step-mother.” Mr Portman gives
ab-čabil and ab-čana as the Aka-Bea terms for “married man” and
“married woman [40].” The two words are the equivalents of the
Akar-Bale ab-čuga and ab-čupal.

D’ ar-odi-ŋa. This word is given by Mr Man as one of the equivalents
for “my father.” It is parallel to the Akar-Bale term ab-atr, and is
strictly a term of physiological relationship, meaning “he who caused
me to be conceived.”

D’ab-eti-ŋa. This is translated by Mr Man as “my mother.” It is the
corresponding term to d’ar-odi-ŋa, and refers to the physiological
relationship.

D’ab-weǰi-ŋa or d’ab-weǰeri-ŋa. This also means “my mother,” and is
only an alternative word for the above. The stems eti and weǰi or
weǰeri seem to be two stems meaning the same thing.

D’ar-odi-re or d’ar-odi-yate. Given by Mr Man as meaning “my son” (if
over three years of age, father speaking). It is the equivalent of the
Akar-Bale ar-kodire.

D’ab-eti-re, d’ab-eti-yate, d’ab-weǰi-re, d’ab-weǰi-yate,
d’ab-weǰeri-re, d’ab-weǰeri-yate. These are all given by Mr Man as
translating “my son” (if over three years of age, mother speaking).
They are equivalent to the Akar-Bale ab-atet.

The above words seem to be derived from three stems, -odi-, -eti-, and
-weǰi- (or -weǰeri-), the stems -eti- and -weǰi- having exactly the
same meaning, and belonging, perhaps, to different dialects. The words
are formed by the addition of the prefixes ar- and ab-, and the verbal
suffixes -ŋa, -re, -yate. Thus we have ar-odi-ŋa, “father,” and
ar-odi-re or ar-odi-yate, “son.” Similarly we have ab-eti-ŋa, “mother,”
and ab-eti-re or ab-eti-yate, “son” (mother speaking), while similar
equivalents are made from the stem -weǰi-. The words given as meaning
“son” may also be used to mean “daughter,” but when it is necessary to
emphasise the female sex, the suffix -pail (meaning “female”) is added,
as d’ar-odi-re-pail, d’ab-eti-re-pail.

Dia ota and dia kata. These are given by Mr Man as meaning respectively
“my son” and “my daughter” (if under three years of age, either parent
speaking). Ota and kata are the terms for the male and female genitals.

Dia ba. This is given by Mr Man as meaning “my daughter” (if over three
years of age, either parent speaking). It is the phonetic equivalent of
dege bua in Akar-Bale.

Dia ba-lola. Given as the equivalent of:—my grandson (either
grandparent speaking), my brother’s grandson (male or female speaking),
my sister’s grandson (male or female speaking). The same phrase with
the addition of -pail, meaning “female,” is given as equivalent to:—my
granddaughter, my brother’s granddaughter, and my sister’s
granddaughter (male or female speaking).

D’ar-ba. According to Mr Man this term is applicable by a male or
female to the son of a brother, a sister, a half-brother, a
half-sister, or of a male or female first cousin. With the addition of
-pail, meaning “female,” it is applicable to the daughter of any of the
above.

Ad en-toba-re, ad en-toba-ŋa, ad en-toka-re, ad en-toka-ŋa. These terms
are given by Mr Man as alternative equivalents for “my elder brother
(male or female speaking).” The stem is -toba- or -toka-, with the
prefix en- and the verbal suffix -re or -ŋa. The ad is a special form
of the first personal pronoun, generally d’. With the addition of
-pail, meaning “female,” the term is applicable to an elder sister. The
word corresponds, both phonetically and in meaning, to the Akar-Bale
en-toaka-ŋa.

D’ar-doati-ŋa. Given as meaning “my younger brother (male or female
speaking).” With the addition of -pail, it is applied to a younger
sister. Mr Man gives the word as being also applicable to a first
cousin, if younger than the speaker.

D’ar-weǰi-ŋa or d’ar-weǰeri-ŋa. These are given by Mr Man as
alternative terms for “younger brother,” and, with the addition of
-pail, for “younger sister.” It is to be noted that the stem -weǰi- or
-weǰeri- is the same that occurs in one of the terms for “mother,” but
that the prefix is different, being in this case ar- instead of ab-.

Dia mama. This is given as meaning “my wife’s brother, or my husband’s
brother (if of equal standing).”

Dia mam-ola. Given as the equivalent of the following:—my husband’s
father, my husband’s mother, my wife’s father, my wife’s mother, my
husband’s elder brother, my wife’s brother (if older), my husband’s
sister’s husband (if older), my wife’s sister (if older and a mother),
my husband’s brother’s wife (if older), my wife’s brother’s wife (if
older).

Mama and Mam-ola are terms of address in Aka-Bea. Mam-ola implies a
somewhat greater degree of respect than Mama, and this in its turn is
more respectful than Mai-ola or Maia.

D’aka-kam. Mr Man gives this as a term applicable to the following
relatives:—my younger brother, my younger half-brother. With the
addition of -pail, it is applicable to a younger sister or half-sister.

Dia otoniya and dia otin. The first of these terms is given as
meaning:—my son-in-law (male or female speaking), and my younger
sister’s husband (male or female speaking). The second term is
feminine, and is given as applicable to the following:—daughter-in-law,
husband’s sister (if younger), husband’s brother’s wife (if younger),
wife’s brother’s wife (if younger). The terms are thus equivalent,
phonetically and in meaning, to the Akar-Bale terms otoni and oten.

Aka-yakat. This is given as the relationship subsisting between a
married couple’s fathers-in-law, and between their mothers-in-law. It
is the equivalent of the Akar-Bale word aka-yat.

D’aka-ba-bula and d’aka-ba-pail. The meaning of the first of these is
given as “my husband’s brother (if younger),” and of the second as “my
younger brother’s wife.” The suffixes -bula and -pail mean “male” and
“female” respectively. The term aka-ba is the phonetic equivalent of
the Akar-Bale word aka-bua. The latter seems to be applied to the
younger brothers and sisters of a man’s wife or of a woman’s husband,
and to these alone. The use of these terms and of the terms otoni and
oten, as recorded from the Akar-Bale tribe, may be compared with the
usage stated by Mr Man, as there is some disagreement. In the following
table the Aka-Bea terms are given as they are found in Mr Man’s list,
while those of the Akar-Bale tribe are given from my own information.


                                      Aka-Bea       Akar-Bale

          Husband’s younger brother   aka-ba-bula   aka-bua
          Husband’s younger sister    otin          aka-bua
          Wife’s younger brother                    aka-bua
          Wife’s younger sister                     aka-bua
          Younger brother’s wife      aka-ba-pail   oten
          Younger sister’s husband    otoniya       otoni.


It will be observed that the Akar-Bale list is consistent and logical
throughout. It seems probable that there is an error in Mr Man’s list,
and that “husband’s younger sister” should be aka-ba-pail instead of
otin, while “younger brother’s wife” should be otin instead of
aka-ba-pail. This would make the Aka-Bea list consistent with itself
and with the Akar-Bale list.

Mr Man gives, in addition to the terms discussed above, a number of
compound terms, which we may examine briefly.

D’ar-čabil-entoba-re. This is given as applicable to any first cousin
or half-brother who is older than the speaker. The feminine form is
given as d’ar-čanol-a-entoba-yate.

D’ar-čabil-entoba-re lai-ik-yate. This is applicable to the wife of any
first cousin or half-brother, if older than the speaker. As lai-ik-yate
means “his wife,” this is a descriptive term. There is a similar term
dia čanol a-entoba-yate lai-ik-yate for the husband of an older female
cousin or half-sister.

D’ar-ba lai-ik-yate. This means “the wife of my ar-ba,” and is
therefore applicable to the wife of the son of a brother or sister or
cousin, and to the husband of a daughter of a brother or sister or
cousin.

There are a few other similar compounds that need not be given.

In Mr Man’s list a step-son is given as eb-aden-ire. The word for
adoption is ot-čat-ŋa, d’ot-čat-ŋa meaning “my adopted child” and
d’ab-mai-ot-čat-ŋa “my adopted father.”

The system of terms of relationship of the Andamanese is of great
interest as being fundamentally different from the systems of other
uncivilized peoples. It is by no means easy to discover the exact usage
of the different terms that are mentioned above. It is, however,
possible to gain a general idea, probably accurate in essentials, of
the way in which the Andamanese languages express the notions of
kinship.

We may consider first the terms of address and the terms of
relationship formed from them. The terms of address are:—


             Aka-Jeru      Aka-Bea   Akar-Bale

             Maia or Mai   Da        Maia              Sir
             Mimi          In        Cana              Lady
             ......        Mama      Mama or mamola.


The first of these is used in addressing males and the second in
addressing females, while the third may be used either for males or for
females and implies a higher degree of respect than the others.

In all the languages of the Great Andaman a man refers to his own
father and mother by adding a personal pronoun to the words meaning
“Sir” and “Lady.” In Aka-J̌eru a man speaks of his father as t’a-mai,
and of his mother as t’a-mimi, the a- being a contracted form of the
prefix aka-. This prefix is always used in this way in the Northern
languages. It is not possible to say tičo maia, which would be the
literal equivalent of dege da in Akar-Bale. In the Akar-Bale language
the translation of “my father” and “my mother” is dege da and deg’ in,
the dege being the personal pronoun “my” as used before a word that has
no prefix. The same formation is present also in the A-Pučikwar and
Aka-Ko̱l languages. For example in Aka-Ko̱l “my father” is tiye tao, and
“my mother” tiye in. In the Aka-Bea language, according to the
information given by Mr Man, the word maia (or maiola) may be used
combined with a prefix, as in d’ab-maiola = “my father,” or it may be
used simply with the personal pronoun as dia maia or dia maiola.
According to Mr Man these last two terms are applied not to a man’s own
father, but to the other persons whom he addresses as maia. This is
contradicted by Mr Portman who gives dia maiola as the Aka-Bea for “my
father.”

In the Aka-Bea and Akar-Bale languages (as also in A-Pučikwar and
Aka-Ko̱l) a man always addresses his grandparent or his father-in-law or
mother-in-law by the term Mama or Mamola. He is therefore able to refer
to these persons by adding the personal pronoun to the term of address,
as dege mama in Akar-Bale. This cannot, however, be regarded as
properly a term denoting relationship, for a man may apply the term
Mama to a man or woman to whom he is not related at all [41].

The next kind of words that we may consider are those that describe the
respective social position of two persons. Such are the words
ot-otoatue and ot-arai-čulute in Aka-J̌eru, meaning “he who was born
before me” and “he who was born after me” respectively. These terms do
not, strictly speaking, convey any idea of consanguinity, although they
are commonly used to refer to a brother or a sister. Exactly equivalent
terms are found in all the languages, for example the en-toaka-ŋa and
ar-dot-ot of Akar-Bale. I was not able to discover in Aka-J̌eru nor yet
in Akar-Bale any term to denote a brother or a sister. In Aka-Bea,
however, Mr Man records the term ar-weǰi-ŋa or ar-weǰeri-ŋa. The stem
-weǰi- or -weǰeri-, as we shall shortly see, is a verbal stem referring
to the act of birth, -ŋa is a verbal suffix, and the prefix ar- conveys
a reference to position in space or time. The whole word seems to mean
“he or she who was born in the same womb as myself,” and is therefore
strictly a word meaning “brother or sister.” It is possible that
similar words exist in Akar-J̌eru and Akar-Bale, but I never came across
them.

Other terms descriptive of social status are the Akar-Bale terms
ab-čuga and ab-čupal which refer to married men and women particularly
those older than the speaker. These also are not properly terms of
relationship, though a man may refer to some of his relatives as
d’ab-čuga, adding the personal pronoun to what is properly a word
descriptive of the social position of the person in question. In
Aka-Bea the equivalent terms are ab-čabil and ab-čana. It would seem
that the term aka-kuam (aka-kam in Aka-Bea) is of the same kind, being
applicable by an older married man to a younger. At any rate I was
unable to discover that it conveyed to the natives any notion of
relationship.

There are a certain number of terms that are descriptive of definite
relationships. In the North ot-e-bui, and in Akar-Bale ab-i-ŋa are both
of them derived from verbal stems meaning “to marry” and are used to
denote a husband or a wife. In the North I did not discover any term
descriptive of a father or a mother save those derived from the terms
of address. In Akar-Bale and Aka-Bea there are such terms; ab-atr in
Akar-Bale means “father” while the word for “mother” was not noted; in
Aka-Bea a father is ar-odi-ŋa, and a mother is ab-eti-ŋa. These words
are descriptive of the physiological relation between a parent and a
child. A man’s adopted mother could not be his ab-eti-ŋa, for this term
applies only to the woman from whose womb he issued. Similarly an
adopted father or a step-father could not be ab-atr or ar-odi-ŋa. There
are similar words for child, which also refer to the physiological
relation of a child to its parent. In the North the stem -tire means
“offspring.” The offspring of a plant, that is the young shoots, are
denoted by the term era-tire, the prefix era- serving to convey a
reference to trees and plants. The offspring of an animal or of a human
being is e-tire. The word e-tire means “the child of somebody” without
reference to any particular person as the parent. In the form ot-tire
the word means “his or her child” with reference to some person
understood. A man or woman cannot in strict accuracy apply the term
ot-tire to his adopted child, though I believe that it might be used in
this loose sense at times. An adopted child is “he whom I have
adopted,” t’oi-čolo-kom. In Akar-Bale and Aka-Bea there are different
terms for “child” according as the reference is to the child of a man
or to that of a woman. Thus in Akar-Bale the child (in the
physiological sense) of a father is ar-kodire, and the child of a
mother is ab-atet. In Aka-Bea the physiological relation of a father
and child is denoted by the verbal stem -odi-. This stem takes the
prefix ar-. The word for father is formed by adding the verbal suffix
-ŋa (ar-odi-ŋa). The word for child (father speaking) is formed by
means of the verbal suffix -re or -yate (ar-odi-re or ar-odi-yate). We
may translate d’ar-odi-ŋa as meaning “he who caused me to be conceived”
while d’ar-odi-re or d’ar-odi-yate means “him whom I caused to be
conceived.” In the same language the physiological relation of a mother
and a child is denoted by the stem -eti-. This stem takes the prefix
ab-. A mother is ab-eti-ŋa, and the child of a mother is ab-eti-re or
ab-eti-yate, the verbal suffixes being used in a way similar to that in
the case of the terms for father and child. In Aka-Bea there is also a
stem -weǰi- or -weǰeri- which has exactly the same meaning as -eti- and
can be substituted for it in the terms meaning mother and child, as
ab-weǰi-ŋa = mother, ab-weǰi-re = child.

Other descriptive words used to denote specific relationships are
e-pota-čiu and e-pota-čip and ot-otone in the Northern languages. The
derivations of these words have not been ascertained. Similar terms in
Akar-Bale are otoni and oten and aka-yat. In this language I did not
discover any word descriptive of the relationship of father-in-law or
mother-in-law. Finally there are such terms as ot-čat-ŋa (adopted) and
ep-taruo-ŋa (step-relative).

The most noteworthy feature of these terms is that it is impossible by
means of them to deal with relationships that are at all distant. Thus
there is no term by which a man can describe his grandfather. In
Akar-Bale the phrase dege mama might mean a grandfather, but it might
equally refer to a father-in-law. It is true that the simple terms may
be combined as Aka-J̌eru “aka-mimi aka-mai” = “his mother’s father,” or
Akar-Bale “deg’ in l’ab-atr” = “my mother’s father,” but these
compounded terms are apparently not often used by the natives. A second
noteworthy feature is the existence of terms to denote physiological
relationships (as opposed to merely juridical relationships) such as
the Aka-Bea ar-odi-ŋa, etc. Finally there is the apparent entire
absence, so far as could be determined, of any classification of
relatives such as is characteristic of the classificatory systems of
relationship. Where there does seem to be some sort of approach to such
classification, as in the use of the Akar-Bale term dege mama, we find
that it is really based not on relationships of consanguinity and
marriage, but on respective social status [42].

As, in the languages of the Andamans, there are few words serving to
denote relationship, and on the contrary a developed system of terms
denoting social status, so in the social organisation of the Andamans
there are very few special duties between relatives, and the conduct of
persons to one another is chiefly determined by their respective social
positions. This will become evident as we proceed, and it will thus be
shown that there is a close connection between the way the natives
denote relationships and the way in which their social life is affected
by questions of relationship.

We have already seen that in the Andamanese social organisation the
family is of great importance. A family is constituted by a permanent
union between one man and one woman. In one of its aspects this union
is a sexual one. By marriage a man acquires the sole right to sexual
congress with the woman who becomes his wife. At the same time it is
the duty of a married man to avoid sexual relations with other women
whether married or unmarried. Promiscuous intercourse between the sexes
is the rule before marriage, and no harm is thought of it. The love
affairs of the boys and girls are carried on in secret, but the older
members of the camp are generally fully aware of all that goes on. What
generally happens is that after a time a youth forms an attachment with
some girl and a marriage between them results from their love affair.

It is impossible, at the present time, to discover exactly how the
Andamanese formerly regarded infidelity on the part of a wife or
husband. In the Great Andaman there is great laxity in this matter at
the present day. Quarrels sometimes arise when a husband discovers an
intrigue between his wife and another man, but very often the husband
seems to condone the adultery of his wife. Mr E. H. Man, writing on
this subject, says that “conjugal fidelity till death is not the
exception, but the rule,” and adds, “It is undoubtedly true that
breaches of morality have occasionally taken place among a few of the
married persons who have resided for any length of time at Port Blair,
but this is only what might be expected from constant association with
the Indian convict attendants at the various homes; justice, however,
demands that in judging of their moral characteristics we should
consider only those who have been uninfluenced by the vices or virtues
of alien races [43].” At the present time conjugal infidelity is very
common and is lightly regarded. It is almost certain that the
establishment of the Penal Settlement amongst them has affected their
morals in this particular, but there does not seem to be any very
satisfactory evidence that their former morality was quite so strict as
Mr Man would have us believe. One piece of evidence in this matter is
that the spread of syphilis, when it was first introduced amongst them
seems to have been very rapid, and yet this was before many of the
tribes had been very seriously affected by the Settlement.

Besides the special sexual relation between a husband and wife there is
a special economic relation, if we may speak of it as such. The two
share one hut between them, or one portion of a communal hut. It is the
duty of the wife to provide the fire-wood and the water for cooking and
drinking, and to cook the meals at the family fire. It is the duty of
the husband to provide flesh food for himself and for his wife, while
it is her duty to provide and prepare vegetable food.

A marriage is not regarded as fully consummated until the birth of a
child. Mr Man states that the survivor of a childless couple is not
looked upon as the chief mourner. A father who has been away from home
greets his wife first on his return and then greets his other
relatives; but if no child has been born to him a husband first greets
his blood-relatives (father, mother, brothers, etc.) and only after
that does he visit his wife.

The only regulation of marriage is on the basis of relationship.
Marriage is forbidden between near consanguinei. The exact rules, in
this matter, if indeed there be any exact rules, are difficult to
discover. It is quite clear that a man would not be permitted to marry
his sister or half-sister, nor his father’s or mother’s sister, nor his
brother’s or sister’s daughter. The question is more difficult when it
comes to the matter of cousins. In 1908 I only found one pair of first
cousins who were married to one another, this being in the Aka-Bo
tribe. The husband and wife were the son and daughter of two brothers.
Mr E. H. Man writes that “marriage is only permissible between those
who are known to be not even distantly connected, except by wedlock,
with each other; so inexorable indeed is this rule, that it extends and
applies equally to such as are related merely by the custom of
adoption.” He adds that marriage between first cousins is forbidden. I
was not able to satisfy myself on this point, but it seemed to me that
while such a marriage as that of first cousins was not actually
regarded as wrong, and therefore forbidden, it was regarded as
preferable that a man should marry a woman not so nearly related to
him. No distinction is made between different kinds of cousin [44].

My observations did not confirm Mr Man’s statement that persons related
by adoption are forbidden to marry. It is necessary, however, to
distinguish two different kinds of adoption. When the parents of a
child of less than six or seven years of age die, the child is adopted
into some other family. We may call this “orphan adoption.” As will be
explained later, there is another custom by which children of over
seven or eight are adopted by a married couple belonging to a local
group other than that of the parents, and live with them till they come
of age. The parents of the child are still alive and they visit him or
her at frequent intervals. No bar to marriage is set up by this kind of
adoption. An adopted son may marry the daughter of his foster-parents.
Indeed when children are betrothed it is the rule for the girl to be
adopted by the boy’s parents, at any rate for a time. On the other hand
it is quite possible that a child adopted when of tender years (as an
orphan) would not be permitted to marry a child of his or her
foster-parents. I was unable to satisfy myself on this point.

There seems to be a prejudice against a woman marrying a man younger
than herself. Some of the women with whom I talked expressed strong
contempt at the idea of marrying a man younger than themselves.
Unfortunately, I neglected to obtain statistics as to the frequency
with which such marriages occur, if they occur at all.

Beyond the prohibition of the marriage of near kin, I could not find
any restriction on marriage. A man may marry a woman from his own local
group or from another, from his own or from another tribe. That
marriages between persons belonging to the same local group did occur
in former times I was able to ascertain with certainty but I was not
able to determine the proportion of such marriages to the whole number.
It is probable that the majority of marriages, or at any rate a large
proportion, were between persons belonging to different local groups.

Marriages are arranged by the older men and women. Children are
sometimes betrothed by their parents while they are still infants. I
found one such case in the North Andaman, and the betrothed couple,
though they were yet small children, were spoken of as being “married.”
Such betrothals are not very common at the present time.

When the parents of a youth who is of suitable age to be married
perceive that he has formed an attachment with a girl, they take it
upon them to arrange a marriage. The matter is first of all talked over
between the young man and his parents. The man’s parents do not
themselves speak to the girl’s parents of the matter, but request some
one or more of their friends to do so. From the moment that the
possibility of a marriage exists the man’s parents avoid speaking to
the girl’s parents. Any communication between them is carried on
through a third person. They send presents to each other, of food and
other objects. The recipient of such a present hastens to make a return
of equal value. If the marriage is arranged the parents on each side
become related to one another by the relationship denoted in Akar-Bale
by the word aka-yat. The duties implied by this relationship will be
described later.

When a marriage has finally been arranged an evening is appointed for
the ceremony. In the North Andaman this is as follows. The bride is
seated on a mat at one end of the dancing ground, her relatives and
friends sitting near her. Torches or heaps of resin are lighted near
by, so that the ceremony may be seen by the on-lookers. The bridegroom
is seated with his friends at the other end of the dancing ground. One
of the older and more respected men addresses the bride, telling her
that she must make a good wife, must provide for her husband such
things as it is the duty of a wife to obtain or make, must see that he
does not run after other women, and must herself remain faithful to
him. He then addresses the bridegroom to the same effect, and taking
him by the hand or arm, leads him to where the bride is seated and
makes him sit down beside her. The relatives and friends weep loudly,
and the young couple look very self-conscious and uncomfortable. The
shyness of the young man is such that he often attempts to run away,
but he is caught by his friends, who are prepared for such an attempt.
After some minutes the officiating elder takes the arms of the bride
and bridegroom and places them around each other’s necks. After a
further interval he again approaches and makes the bridegroom sit on
the bride’s lap [45]. They sit so for some minutes and the ceremony is
over. The other members of the community generally have a dance on such
an occasion, but in this the newly wedded pair do not join. A hut has
already been prepared for them, and all their friends make them
presents of useful objects with which to start housekeeping. They
retire shyly to their new hut, while their friends continue dancing.
The day after the ceremony the bride and bridegroom are decorated by
their friends with white clay. For a few days the newly married couple
are very shy of each other, hardly venturing to speak to or look at one
another: but they soon settle down to their new position in the life of
the community. During the early days of their marriage they are
abundantly supplied with food by their friends. They are not addressed
or spoken of by name, but if their names be A and B, the husband is
called “the husband of B” while the wife is called “the wife of A.”

In the South Andaman the ceremony is much the same as in the North, the
only difference being that the bridegroom is led to where the bride is
sitting and is made to sit on her lap straightway, remaining there for
a few minutes.

When a husband dies his widow may marry again if she wishes. As a rule
I believe that it is not considered fitting that she should take
another husband before the end of her mourning for her former one. Mr
Man says “it is not considered decorous that any fresh alliance should
be contracted until about a year had elapsed from the date of
bereavement [46].” I knew of one case, however, of a woman with a young
child who married again only a fortnight or so after her husband’s
death.

Mr Man speaks of a custom “which all but compels a bachelor or widower
to propose to the childless widow of his elder brother or cousin (if
she be not past her prime), while she has no choice beyond remaining
single or accepting him; should she have no younger brother-in-law (or
cousin by marriage), however, she is free to wed whom she will. It
should be added that marriage with a deceased wife’s younger sister is
equally a matter of necessity on the part of a childless widower [47].”

I was not able to come across a case in which a man had actually
married his elder brother’s widow in recent years. The natives whom I
questioned confirmed Mr Man’s statement, which, moreover, was based on
at least one instance known to him as having occurred. It may be noted
that in his description of this instance Mr Man says that the woman
married her husband’s “brother or cousin,” leaving us in doubt as to
which of these two relatives it really was. There is an ambiguity in
the use of the term “younger brother,” for the Andamanese have no word
meaning simply “younger brother,” but only such terms as ot-arai-čulute
and the equivalents in other languages, which apply to any younger
person, whether actually a brother or cousin or not.

The recent changes in the social life of the Andamanese render it
difficult to determine what was the former practice in matters of this
sort, but I believe that the custom was this, that when a man of a
local group died the older men selected one of the unmarried men and
required him to marry the widow. They selected a man who was younger
than the deceased, that is who was his ot-arai-čulute, and gave the
preference to an unmarried younger brother if there were one, or to a
relative of the deceased, such as a father’s brother’s son.

It may be noted that this custom may conflict with the other custom,
previously mentioned, that a woman objects to marrying a man younger
than herself. In the case mentioned by Mr Man a young man was compelled
to marry a woman who was considerably his senior [48].

I believe that, in connection with, or underlying this custom there was
an objection against a widow marrying a man who was older than her
former husband (and who would therefore be his ot-otoatue). I regret
that I cannot speak with certainty on these matters.

We may turn now to the duties to one another of parents and children.
During their infancy the children are in the care of the mother.
Children are, however, such favourites with the Andamanese that a child
is played with and petted and nursed not only by his own father and
mother but by everyone in the village. A woman with an unweaned child
will often give suck to the children of other women. Babies are not
weaned till they are three or four years old.

Before the children can walk, they are carried about by the mother, and
sometimes by the father or other persons, in a bark sling (called čiba
in Aka-J̌eru), which is shown in Plate XIV. After they can walk the
children generally accompany their mothers in their expeditions near
the camp for firewood or vegetables. When they are not with their
mothers they amuse themselves with games in the village or on the
beach. All the children of the coast villages learn to swim when they
are very young, in fact almost as soon as they learn to walk, and many
of their games are conducted in the water.

When a boy reaches the age of five or six his father makes him a toy
bow and arrows, and sometimes a toy canoe. From this time the boy
begins to learn the occupations of men and begins to pick up knowledge
about the animals and trees and fishes of his country. The girl,
accompanying her mother on her expeditions to gather roots and seeds,
or to catch fish or pick up molluscs on the reefs, learns what it is
necessary for women to know.

Until the age of about eight to ten a child lives with his parents,
having a place in the family hut, and a share of the family meal. The
children are treated with extreme kindness, and are never punished, and
hardly ever scolded. Should the parents die the children are adopted by
friends or relatives, and such adopted children are treated by the
foster-parents in exactly the same way as their own children.

At the age of ten, or a little before, a change is often brought about
in the life of a child, owing to the custom of adoption. Mr Man writes
of this custom as follows:

“It is said to be of rare occurrence to find any child above six or
seven years of age residing with its parents, and this because it is
considered a compliment and also a mark of friendship for a married
man, after paying a visit, to ask his hosts to allow him to adopt one
of their children. The request is usually complied with, and
thenceforth the child’s home is with his (or her) foster-father: though
the parents in their turn adopt the children of other friends, they
nevertheless pay continual visits to their own child, and occasionally
ask permission (!) to take him (or her) away with them for a few days.
A man is entirely at liberty to please himself in the number of
children he adopts, but he must treat them with kindness and
consideration, and in every respect as his own sons and daughters, and
they, on their part, render him filial affection and obedience. It not
unfrequently happens that in course of time permission to adopt a
foster-child is sought by a friend of the soi-disant father, and is at
once granted (unless any exceptional circumstance should render it
personally inconvenient), without even the formality of a reference to
the actual parents, who are merely informed of the change, in order
that they may be enabled to pay their periodical visits [49].”

The above passage is quoted because Mr Man had better opportunities of
observation in this matter than myself. At the present day there are
not many children in the Andamans, and this is an obstacle in the way
of this custom of adoption. From my own observation, however, I should
put the age at which it is customary for children to be adopted at
higher than six or seven. I found children of about seven or eight
still living with their own parents. The usual age of adoption seemed
to me to be from nine or ten years upwards.

A man and his wife adopt in this way children belonging to a local
group other than their own. The adopted child lives with his or her
foster-parents, having a place in their hut and a share of their meals.
From about the age of ten children of both sexes begin to be of service
to their parents or foster-parents in many ways. The foster-parents
treat their adopted children in exactly the same way that they would
treat their own children, and the children on the other hand show the
same regard and affection to their foster-parents that they do to their
own parents, and assist them in every way that they can. Their own
parents come to visit them at regular intervals.

The period of childhood is brought to an end at about the age of
puberty by certain ceremonies to be described in the next chapter.
After the beginning of these ceremonies a boy ceases to live in the hut
of his parents or his foster-parents, and must live with the young
unmarried men and widowers in what has been called the bachelors’ hut.
From this time until he marries, his services are constantly required
by his parents or by his foster-parents, and he is expected to obey
them and help them in any way he can. It is only after his marriage
that he becomes relatively independent and free to please himself in
his own actions, and even then he is required to provide his parents or
his foster-parents with food, and to serve them in any way they may
need.

A girl, during the period between the beginning of the initiation
ceremonies and her marriage, continues, at any rate, in some cases, and
in these days, to live with her parents or with foster-parents. Mr Man
states that the unmarried women and girls occupy a spinsters’ hut
similar to the bachelors’ hut. It is possible that this was the former
custom. I found instances of an unmarried girl occupying a place in the
hut of a married couple who made use of her services and controlled her
conduct, regarding her in the light of a foster-daughter. On one
occasion I found two unmarried girls occupying a separate hut adjoining
that of a married couple, who looked after the girls who occupied it.

The position of an unmarried girl is very similar to that of an
unmarried youth. She is required to help her elders, in particular
either her parents or her foster-parents, i.e. the married couple under
whose care she is for the time being.

After marriage a son continues to help his parents, providing them with
food and seeing that they are comfortable. If either a man or a woman
lives in a local group other than that of his or her parents, he or she
pays frequent visits to them.

From the time that a youth or girl ceases to belong to the family
household, his or her duties to the parents are really only the same in
kind as the duties that every young man and woman owes to all the older
men and women. Though there is no difference in kind, yet a man or
woman is expected to show more affection and respect for his or her own
parents than to other persons of the same social standing.

The only other relationship, besides that of husband and wife and that
of parents and children, which exists inside the family, is that
between children of the same parents. The conduct of brothers to one
another depends on their respective ages. The younger is expected to
give way to the elder, while the latter protects and looks after the
former. The relation of sisters to one another is similar.

The duties of a man and woman to his or her relatives, other than those
to parents, brothers and sisters, and even to some extent the duties to
these near relatives, are not distinguishable in kind from the duties
he or she owes to other persons who are not relatives. Thus a young
married man owes certain duties to all the older married men of about
the age of his father. These duties are the same in kind as those
towards his own father and his foster-father, the only difference being
that he must defer more to his own father than to other men, and must
be more constant in his attentions to him. I could not discover any way
in which a man distinguished, in his dealings with them, his father’s
brother from his mother’s brother. They are both of them older men whom
he must respect and to whom he must make presents of food. Similarly a
father’s sister is not distinguished, so far as I could discover, from
a mother’s sister. A man treats both of them in much the same way that
he treats his own mother, or any other woman of the same age. There is
only a slight difference in connection with parents-in-law. A man would
not be so familiar with his parents-in-law as he would with his parents
or their brothers or sisters, and treats them with more deference and
respect. This is borne out by the Akar-Bale custom of applying to a
father-in-law or mother-in-law the same term of address (Mama) that is
used in speaking to grandparents and others to whom it is required to
show particular deference.

In the same way there is very little difference between the way a man
conducts himself towards his elder brother and his conduct towards any
other man of the same age. Brothers are often close comrades, putting
their huts next to one another in the same village, joining together
whenever possible in hunting or fishing expeditions, and so on; but a
man may have a comrade who is not his brother, whom he will treat in
exactly the same way.

The general attitude of a married man to other married men somewhat
younger than himself is very much that towards a younger brother. As
between men and women one special duty appears in this connection. A
married man may not and will not have any close dealings with the wife
of a man younger than himself. It is not considered fitting that he
should speak to her. If he wished to have any communication with her,
he would do so through some third person. It would be regarded as a
wrong thing to do if he were ever to touch her. The only explanation
that the natives give of this custom is by saying that a man feels
“shy” or “ashamed” towards his younger brother’s or friend’s wife. The
custom is exactly the same with respect to the wife of any younger man,
whether a brother, a cousin, or a stranger.

This custom depends on the distinction between older and younger. A man
may be on terms of familiarity with the wife of a man older than
himself, whom he would treat much as he would an elder sister.

There is one special relationship which has peculiar duties attaching
to it, and this is the relationship between the father and mother of a
man on the one hand and the father and mother of the man’s wife on the
other. In the Akar-Bale language such persons are said to be aka-yat to
one another. A man or a woman will not have any immediate dealings with
a person who is his aka-yat. He will not speak to him, and if they
should meet or be sitting near to one another they would avoid looking
at each other. On the other hand a man is constantly sending presents
to his aka-yat. The natives say that two persons in this relation feel
“shy” or “ashamed.” (There is only one word in Andamanese for these two
English words, ot-ǰete in Aka-J̌eru.) The shyness begins at the moment
when a marriage between their respective children is first discussed as
a possibility, and lasts apparently till death.

As throwing a little light on this peculiar relation it may be
mentioned that a similar relation exists between two men who have been
through either the turtle-eating ceremony or the pig-eating ceremony
(to be described in the next chapter) on the same occasion. Two such
men will avoid any contact with one another, not speaking to nor
looking at each other when they chance to meet, but on the other hand
they will be constantly giving each other presents of all kinds,
sending them through some third person.

The main features of the relationship system of the Andaman Islanders
may be briefly summed up. The duties that one person owes to another
are determined much less by their relation to one another by
consanguinity and marriage, than by their respective ages and social
status. Even within the family, which nevertheless is of importance,
the duty of a child to a parent is very little different from his duty
to any other person of the same age. There is very little of any
special customs relating to conduct towards different kinds of
relatives. Corresponding to this we find very few terms to denote
relationships and a considerable development of the terms which denote
age and social status. Thus a man’s duties to his elder brother are
much the same as those towards the other men of the same age, and we
find that there is no word for “elder brother” but only a term by which
a man distinguishes all the men of his own generation older than
himself from those who are younger. Similarly there are no duties that
a man owes to his father’s brother or to his mother’s brother which he
does not also owe, in perhaps a less degree, to other men of the same
age, and there is no term by which he can distinguish his father’s
brother from those others.

If this account of the system of relationship be accurate it will be
seen that the Andamanese society contrasts very strongly, in this
matter, with other primitive societies [50].

It remains for us only to examine the social relations between the
different local groups. Two neighbouring groups, whether of the same
tribe or of different tribes, might be either friendly towards one
another or unfriendly. Friendly relations were kept alive by several of
the customs of the Andamanese, by the intermarriage of members of
different groups, by the adoption of children from one group to
another, and by the fact that a man of one group might take up his
residence more or less permanently with another (particularly when he
married a woman of that group, or was adopted when a boy by one of the
men belonging to it). All these customs served to bind some persons in
the one group to persons in the other, and thus prevent the two groups
from becoming entirely unfriendly to one another.

When two neighbouring local groups were friendly to one another
communication between them was kept up by visitors from one group to
another, and by occasional meetings of the whole of the two groups.

Either a single person or a family might at any time pay a visit to
another camp, staying a few days or weeks or even longer. A man would,
however, only go visiting when he was sure of a welcome. Such visits
were most frequent in the fine months of the year (December to May). As
a husband and wife in many instances belonged to different local groups
they would, if living with the man’s parents, pay a visit every year to
the parents or other relatives of the wife. The parents of a child that
had been adopted by a member of another local group would make a point
of visiting the child when they could. Visitors to a camp would always
take with them presents to be given to their hosts. A visitor was
hospitably entertained, being given the best of the food, and joined
his hosts in their hunting and fishing expeditions. The duty of
hospitality is one upon which the Andamanese lay stress.

The meetings of two or more local groups were organised from time to
time by the more prominent men. The time and place of the meeting would
be fixed and invitations sent out to the neighbours. The visitors, men,
women and children, would arrive at the appointed time, and would be
accommodated as well as possible by the hosts. During the first few
hours, as the natives themselves told me, everyone would feel a little
shy and perhaps frightened, and it would take some time for this
feeling to wear off. The visitors would bring with them various
objects, such as bows, arrows, adzes, baskets, nets, red paint, white
clay, and so on. These were given by the visitors to their hosts, and
other presents were received in return. Although the natives themselves
regarded the objects thus given as being presents, yet when a man gave
a present to another he expected that he would receive something of
equal value in return, and would be very angry if the return present
did not come up to his expectations. A man would sometimes mention,
when giving his present, that he would like some particular object in
exchange, but this was the exception and not the rule, and the process
cannot be spoken of as barter. In certain cases it undoubtedly served a
useful economic purpose. Thus if a local group had no red ochre or
white clay in their own country they could obtain these commodities by
exchange with others who had. In the case of a meeting between forest
and coast dwellers, the former could obtain such things as shells, red
paint made with turtle fat, and other objects with which they could not
provide themselves in any other way. It was in this way also that the
iron obtained from a wreck on one part of the coast would be spread
over a large area. For the most part, however, as each local group, and
indeed each family, was able to provide itself with everything that it
needed in the way of weapons and utensils, the exchange of presents did
not serve the same purpose as trade and barter in more developed
communities.

The purpose that it did serve was a moral one. The object of the
exchange was to produce a friendly feeling between the two persons
concerned, and unless it did this it failed of its purpose. It gave
great scope for the exercise of tact and courtesy. No one was free to
refuse a present that was offered to him. Each man and woman tried to
out-do the others in generosity. There was a sort of amiable rivalry as
to who could give away the greatest number of valuable presents.

The visitors remained with their hosts for a few days. The time was
spent in hunting, feasting and dancing, and in the exchange of presents
above described. The hosts made every effort to provide the camp with
plenty of good things. The guests took their share in the hunting and
fishing expeditions. Every evening was spent in singing and dancing.
Some of the men were sure to have composed new songs for such an
occasion.

Such meetings as these were sometimes the means of bringing to an end
past quarrels between the local groups, but occasionally they were the
cause of new quarrels. The hosts, or some of them, might think that
they had been shabbily treated in the matter of presents, or the guests
might complain that they were not well enough entertained. It often
needed a man of strong influence to maintain harmony in the camp. Angry
words might lead to the rapid breaking up of a meeting, and even result
in a feud between the two groups.

Quarrels between individuals, as we have seen, were often taken up by
friends on each side. This was particularly the case when the two
opponents belonged to different local groups. Before the days of the
settlement of the islands there often arose in this way petty quarrels
between neighbouring local groups. In some instances there appear to
have been feuds of long standing; in others there was a quarrel, a
fight or two, and the enemies made peace with one another, until a
fresh cause of disagreement should arise.

It does not seem that there was ever such a thing as a stand-up fight
between two parties. The whole art of fighting was to come upon your
enemies by surprise, kill one or two of them and then retreat. A local
group that had some grievance against another would decide to make an
attack. They might seek and obtain the aid of friends from other local
groups. The men who were to take part in the expedition would paint
themselves and put on various ornaments and join in a dance [51]. They
would then set out, either by land or by sea, in the direction of the
encampment they meant to attack. Their weapons consisted of bows and
arrows, and they carried no shields or other defensive weapons. They
would not venture to attack the enemy’s camp unless they were certain
of taking it by surprise. For this reason such attacks were generally
made either in the evening when the camp would be busy with the
preparation of the evening meal, or at early dawn, when every one would
be asleep. The attacking party would rush the camp and shoot as many
men as they could. If they met with any serious resistance or lost one
of their own number they would immediately retire. Those attacked, if
they were really taken by surprise, were generally compelled to save
themselves by flight. Though the aim of the attacking party was to kill
the men, it often happened that women or children were killed. The
whole fight would last only a few minutes, ending either with the
retirement of the attackers before resistance, or the flight of those
attacked into the jungle. A wounded enemy would be killed if found.

Such attacks and counter-attacks might be continued for some years,
thus establishing a feud between two neighbouring local groups. More
usually, however, after one or two such fights peace would be made. In
the tribes of the North Andaman there was a special peace-making
ceremony, that will be described in the next chapter. All peace
negotiations were conducted through the women. One or two of the women
of the one group would be sent to interview the women of the other
group to see if they were willing to forget the past and make friends.
It seems that it was largely the rancour of the women over their slain
relatives that kept the feud alive, the men of the two parties being
willing to make friends much more readily than the women.

An example of a long-continued feud, which, to all appearance, has been
in existence for several centuries, is that between the Aka-Bea and the
J̌a̤rawa of the South Andaman. The J̌a̤rawa have the advantage over the
Aka-Bea that their camps are situated in the dense forest and are
difficult to find, while the camps of the Aka-Bea are mostly along the
sea-coast. At the present day the J̌a̤rawa take some precautions against
being surprised in their camp by a hostile party. The camp is often
placed on the top of a hill and the trees in the neighbourhood are cut
down so that they have a good view. The paths leading to the camp are
also cleared and made wider than is usual in a native path. At times it
would seem that they keep sentries on the look-out.

The Aka-Bea and the J̌a̤rawa were inveterate enemies. Whenever two
parties of them met by any chance, or came in the neighbourhood of one
another, the larger party would attack the other. When the Settlement
of Port Blair was established, friendly relations were set up with the
Aka-Bea, and since that time the hostility of the J̌a̤rawa has been
directed not only against the friendly Andamanese (Aka-Bea, etc.) but
also against the inhabitants of the Settlement [52].

Such a thing as fighting on a large scale seems to have been unknown
amongst the Andamanese. In the early days of the Penal Settlement of
Port Blair, the natives of the South Andaman combined in large numbers
to make an attack on the Settlement, but this seems to have been an
unusual course of action in order to meet what was to them an
altogether unusual contingency, their territory having been invaded by
a large force of foreigners. Their only fights amongst themselves seem
to have been the brief and far from bloody skirmishes described above,
where only a handful of warriors were engaged on each side and rarely
more than one or two were killed. Of such a thing as a war in which the
whole of one tribe joined to fight with another tribe I could not find
any evidence in what the natives were able to tell me of their former
customs.

As showing within what narrow limits the different local groups held
communication with one another, it may be mentioned that till the year
1875 the Aka-Bea natives of Port Blair did not know of the existence of
the Aka-Ko̱l tribe, less than fifty miles distant, nor of any of the
tribes further north. As a general rule it may be said that no man knew
anything of any of the natives living more than twenty miles from his
own part of the country.








CHAPTER II

CEREMONIAL CUSTOMS


In such a society as that of the Andaman Islanders it is possible to
distinguish three different ways in which the actions of individuals
are regulated or determined by the society. There are, first of all,
what we may distinguish as “moral customs,” whereby the actions of
individuals in relation to one another are regulated on principles of
right and wrong conduct. It was with customs of this kind that we were
concerned in the last chapter. Secondly, the activities by which the
natives obtain their food and make the various objects of which they
have need are determined by tradition. Such activities are purely
utilitarian and they are regulated, not by commandments similar to
those of the moral law, but by accumulated technical knowledge as to
the means by which a particular object may be attained. These we may
speak of as the “technical customs” of the society.

There are customs of a third kind which are distinguishable both from
moral customs and from technical customs. For example, when a man dies,
his near relatives observe certain mourning customs, such as covering
their bodies with clay. Such customs are distinguished from technical
customs by having no utilitarian purpose. They are distinguished from
moral customs by this, that they are not immediately concerned with the
effects of the action of one person upon another.

It is difficult to find a satisfactory name for all the customs of this
kind. A large number of them may be spoken of as “ceremonial customs,”
and it is this that explains the title of the present chapter.

It is not pretended that this division of social customs into three
different kinds is of any great or permanent value, and it is only
introduced as an aid to the exposition of the customs of the
Andamanese. It will be argued in a later chapter that many of the
customs described in the present chapter have a common psychological
basis.

Of any customs in connection with the birth of children I was able to
learn very little, as no births at which I could be present occurred
during my stay at the islands. Earlier writers have given very little
information on this subject.

During the latter part of the period of pregnancy, and for about a
month after the birth of the child, the mother and father must observe
certain restrictions. In particular there are certain foods that they
may not eat. The statements of different informants on this matter did
not quite agree with each other, and it seems that there were slightly
different rules in different tribes. According to an Akar-Bale
informant the man and woman may not eat dugong, honey and yams; they
may eat the flesh of small but not of full-grown pigs and turtle. An
informant of one of the Northern tribes said that the woman may not eat
full-grown pig, Paradoxurus, turtle, dugong, the fish komar, monitor
lizard, honey and yams; her husband may eat these things but must
carefully avoid eating certain fishes.

The natives give two different reasons for these rules. One is that if
these foods be eaten by the parents the child will be ill. The other is
that the parents themselves will be ill. The latter is the explanation
most commonly offered.

The baby is named some time before it is born, and from that time the
parents are not addressed or spoken of by name. For example, if the
name chosen be Rea, the father will be spoken of as Rea aka-mai (Rea’s
father) instead of by his own name. The mother may be referred to as
Rea it-pet, from the word it-pet meaning “belly.” This practice is
continued till some weeks after the birth, when the use of the names of
the parents is once more resumed.

In child-birth the woman is assisted by the matrons of the camp. She is
seated in her hut in the village on fresh leaves, and a piece of wood
is placed at her back for her to lean against. Her legs are flexed so
that her knees may be clasped by her arms. The only manipulation is
pressure exerted on the upper part of the abdomen by one of the
attendant women. The umbilical cord is severed with a knife, formerly
of cane or bamboo, but in these days of iron. The after-birth is buried
in the jungle. The infant is washed and then scraped with a Cyrena
shell. After a few days he (or she) is given a coating of clay (odu).

If a baby dies and within a year or two the mother again becomes
pregnant, it is said that it is the same baby born again, and the name
of the deceased child is given to it. Thus one woman had three children
of the same name, the first two having died soon after birth. According
to the native ideas this was really the same child born three times. It
is only those who die in infancy that are thus reincarnated.

In the Northern tribes it is believed that a woman can tell the sex of
her unborn child. If she feels it on the left side it is a male,
because men hold the bow (the typical masculine implement) in the left
hand. If she feels it on the right side it is a female, because it is
in her right hand that a woman holds her fishing net.

A married man who is childless and desires a child will wear a čiba
(sling of bark used for carrying children) round his shoulders when he
is sitting in camp. The čiba and the way it is used for carrying
children may be seen in the photograph in Plate XIV. If a childless
woman wishes to have a child she may catch, cook and eat a certain
species of small frog.

At a place called Tonmuket in the North Andaman there is a spot to
which it is said that women may resort if they wish to become pregnant.
On the reef at this spot there are a large number of stones which,
according to the legend, were once little children. The woman who
desires a child walks out on to the reef when the tide is low and
stands upon these stones. It is believed that one of the baby souls
will enter her body and become incarnate [53].

In the North Andaman there is some sort of association between the
unborn souls of babies, the green pigeon and the Ficus laccifera tree.
The same name, Reŋko, is used to denote both the green pigeon and also
the Ficus laccifera, of the fruit of which the pigeon is very fond. The
belief of the natives is sometimes stated by saying that the souls of
unborn children live in the Ficus trees, and that if a baby dies before
it has been weaned its soul goes back to the tree. Another statement of
the natives is that it is when the green pigeon is calling that the
soul of a baby goes into its mother. The Ficus is to a certain extent
tabu. I was told that the tree must not be cut or damaged. Nevertheless
the natives do cut the tree in order to obtain the bark of the aerial
roots from which they prepare a fibre that they use for making personal
ornaments. There is no tabu in connection with the green pigeon, which
may be killed and eaten.

In most primitive societies, if not in all, there are ritual or
ceremonial observances in connection with the change by which a boy or
girl becomes a man or woman. The ceremonies that are performed to mark
this change are commonly spoken of in ethnological literature as
“initiation ceremonies.” The term is not perhaps the best that could be
chosen, but usage has rendered it familiar.

The life of an Andaman Islander is divided into three well-marked
periods, corresponding roughly with the physiological periods of
childhood, adolescence, and maturity. The first period lasts from birth
till about the advent of puberty; the second lasts from puberty till
after marriage; the third extends from marriage to death.

During the period of childhood the boy or girl lives with his or her
parents, or, in the later years of the period, with adopted parents,
having a place in the family hut and a share in the family meal. A girl
continues to live with her parents or with her adopted parents until
she marries. When boys have finished growing, and have reached the
condition of young men, they cease to live with their parents or
adopted parents and, until they are married, they occupy a bachelors’
hut of their own, and have their own meal.

Every boy and girl has to undergo the operation of scarification. This
is begun when the child is quite young, and a small portion of the body
is operated on. The operation is repeated at intervals during
childhood, until the whole body has been scarified. A small flake of
quartz or glass is used, and a series of fine incisions are made in the
skin. The usual method is to cover a small portion of the skin with a
number of parallel rows of short cuts. The choice of the design (if it
can be called such) rests entirely with the person who performs the
operation, who is in all cases a woman. The incisions leave scars that
can usually only be seen when close to the person. In the photograph of
Plate XV a pattern of scars may be seen. In this case the incisions
became infected and raised scars were produced, and it is for this
reason that they are visible in the photograph. In ordinary cases
raised scars are not produced and the scarification is hardly visible
in a photograph.

The only reason that the natives give for this custom is either that it
improves the personal appearance, or else that it helps to make the
child grow strong.

In the case of a girl the period of childhood is brought to a close by
a ceremony that takes place on the occasion of her first menstrual
discharge. The ceremony I describe is that in use in the Northern
tribes, but I believe that the ceremony of the Southern tribes is very
similar. On the occurrence of the first menstrual discharge the girl
tells her parents, who weep over her. She must then go and bathe in the
sea for an hour or two by herself. After that she goes back to her
parents’ hut or to a special shelter that is put up for the occasion.
She is not required to go away from the camp. All ornaments are removed
from her, only a single belt of Pandanus leaf being left, with an apron
of čainyo leaves. Strips of Pandanus leaf are attached round her arms
near the shoulders and round her wrists, and others are placed as bands
crossing her chest from the shoulder to the waist on the opposite side,
and crossing her abdomen from the iliac crest on the one side to the
trochanter on the other. These are so attached that the long loose ends
hang down at the girl’s side. Bunches of leaves, either čelmo
(Tetranthera lancæfolia) or, if these be not obtainable, poramo
(Myristica longifolia) are fastened beneath her belt before and behind.
Other leaves of the same kind are placed for her to sit upon. The
strips of Pandanus leaf and the bundle of leaves are visible in the
photograph reproduced in Plate XVI.

Thus covered with leaves the girl must sit in the hut allotted to her,
with her legs doubled up beneath her and her arms folded. A piece of
wood or bamboo is placed at her back for her to lean against, as she
may not lie down. If she is cramped she may stretch one of her legs or
one of her arms, but not both arms or both legs at the same time. To
feed herself she may release one of her hands, but she must not take up
the food with her fingers; a skewer of čainyo wood [54] is given her
with which to feed herself. She may not speak nor sleep for 24 hours.
Her wants are attended to by her parents and their friends, who sit
near her to keep her from falling asleep.

The girl sits thus for three days. Early every morning she leaves the
hut to bathe for an hour in the sea. At the end of the three days she
resumes her life in the village. For a month following she must bathe
in the sea every morning at dawn.

During the ceremony and for a short time afterwards the girl is not
addressed or spoken of by name, but is referred to as Alebe or Toto.
The meaning of the first word is not known. Toto is the name of the
species of Pandanus from which women’s belts are made and the leaves of
which are used in the ceremony. On the occasion of this ceremony the
girl is given a new name, her “flower-name,” and from this time till
after the birth of her first child she is never addressed or spoken of
by the name which she had as a child, but only by the name given to her
at this ceremony. The name given is that of a plant or tree which is in
flower at the time. If the ceremony takes place when the ǰili is in
flower she is called J̌ili; if when the ǰeru is in flower she is named
J̌eru, and so on. These names will be mentioned again later in the
present chapter.

After this ceremony the girl is said to be aka-ndu-kolo̱t. For some time
afterwards she must not have her head shaved, and she must not use red
paint or white clay.

I was not able to learn much about the native ideas in connection with
the menstrual function. According to the account given me by one
informant I gathered that the girl’s first menstrual discharge is
supposed to be due to sexual intercourse. The man’s breath goes into
her nose and this produces the discharge. It is believed that if a man
were to touch a girl during this period, either during the ceremony or
for some time after it, his arm would swell up.

At every recurrence of the menstrual period a woman is required to
abstain from eating certain foods. According to an Akar-Bale informant
these are, in that tribe, pork, turtle, Paradoxurus, honey and yams. An
Aka-Čari informant added to the above list dugong, monitor lizard, and
the fish komar. If she ate any of these things at such a time she would
be ill. This continues throughout her life till the climacteric. A
menstruating woman is not required to leave the camp, as she is in many
savage communities.

From the moment of the ceremony just described the girl enters a new
condition which is denoted in the Aka-J̌eru language by the word aka-op
(aka-yaba in Aka-Bea). This word means that the person to whom it is
applied is under certain ritual restrictions, chiefly concerned with
foods that may not be eaten.

In the case of a boy there is no physiological event so clearly marked
as there is in that of a girl. It rests with the relatives and friends
to decide when the boy is to become aka-op. It would seem that in the
Southern tribes there is no ceremony on this occasion. Among the
Northern tribes the boy is made aka-op by means of a ceremony that
consists of making the scars on his back that are customary in these
tribes [55].

When the friends and relatives of a boy decide that he is old enough to
have the incisions made in his back a dance is held in the evening, and
the boy is required to dance through the whole night till he is tired.
As soon as morning breaks he is made to bathe in the sea for two hours
or so. He is then seated in some convenient place, not in a hut. The
boy kneels down and bends forward till his elbows rest on the ground in
front. One of the older men takes a pig-arrow and with the sharpened
blade makes a series of cuts on the boy’s back. Each cut is horizontal,
and they are arranged in three vertical rows, each row consisting of
from 20 to 30 cuts. When the cutting is finished the boy sits up, with
a fire at his back, until the bleeding stops. During the operation and
for a few hours following it the boy must remain silent. There is no
treatment of the wounds to produce raised scars. The scars are much
more noticeable on some men than on others.

The boy does not receive a new name on this occasion, but for a few
weeks his own name is dropped and he is addressed and spoken of as
Eǰido. From this time the boy is described as being oko-taliŋ-kolo̱t,
this being the masculine term corresponding to aka-ndu-kolo̱t for girls.
From the time the cuts are made on his back the boy becomes aka-op and
is under certain restrictions as to what foods he may eat.

When the wounds on his back are thoroughly healed similar cuts are made
on his chest. I found a certain number of men who had no visible scars
on their chests, but in the North Andaman every man has the three rows
of scars on his back. Some of the women of the North Andaman have
similar scars on their chests and a very few have them also on the
back. These scars on women are not regularly made as part of the
initiation ceremonies, and may be made after the woman has been married
for some years.

During the period that a boy or girl is aka-op he or she is required by
the customs of the tribe to abstain from eating certain foods. The
exact rules in this matter differ from tribe to tribe. More
particularly there are important differences between the coast-dwellers
on the one hand and the jungle-dwellers on the other. The general
principle, however, is in all cases the same. The boy (or girl) must
abstain from all the chief foods of the people, and since he could not
abstain from them all at one time without starving, he takes them in
turn. It is in the order in which the different foods are forbidden
that the chief differences occur.

In the Aka-Čari tribe of the North Andaman, where all are
coast-dwellers, the boy or girl, during the first part of the aka-op
period must not eat turtle, dugong, porpoise, komar (a fish), hawksbill
turtle, the two kinds of edible grubs (pata and čokele), the monitor
lizard, the flying fox (Pteropus), certain birds (perhaps all birds),
certain shell-fish, the four varieties of mangrove seed (kao, čimi,
kabal and kaplo), three edible roots (mino, labo and mikulu), and a
large number of other vegetable foods, including lo̱itok, poroto (if
cooked, but it may be eaten raw), biǰo, čoroŋo, celet, buroŋ, bui,
bakle, čo, čatali, and kata. A certain number of fishes must be added
to this list. This period is brought to a end by the turtle-eating
ceremony which will be presently described. After this ceremony,
turtle, which is one of the chief foods of the Aka-Čari, may be eaten,
although certain parts of the turtle (such as the intestinal fat) are
still forbidden, and the youth is also allowed to eat many of the other
foods previously forbidden. On the other hand he is now required not to
eat pork and a number of other foods both animal and vegetable. During
this second period certain minor ceremonies take place, as for instance
on the first occasion on which turtle’s eggs are eaten. This period is
brought to an end by the pig-eating ceremony. After that the youth is
again free to eat pork. As turtle and pork are the two most important
foods the ceremonies and observances in connection with these occupy a
position of greater importance. After the pig-eating ceremony the youth
is made free of one food after another, until some time after he is
married he becomes free to partake of any of the foods available. In
the case of some of the more important foods, such as honey, dugong,
porpoise, the fish komar, etc., there is a sort of minor ceremony. The
only ceremonies of any great importance in this tribe are the
turtle-eating and the pig-eating ceremonies.

In the forest-dwelling communities of the North Andaman things are
necessarily different. These people only eat such foods as turtle,
dugong, etc. when they are visiting their friends on the coast. The
three most important ceremonies amongst these people are the
ńyuri-eating, the pig-eating and the honey-eating ceremonies. (The
ńyuri is a fish that is found in the creeks.) According to my
informants of the Aka-Bo tribe the foods that must be avoided during
the first part of the abstention period are all species of fish found
in inland creeks (ńyuri, burto, bari, bol, kuato), the monitor lizard,
sucking-pig, two species of snake (or-čubi and uluku-čubi), a number of
vegetable foods and also honey. After the ńyuri-eating ceremony the
different kinds of fish mentioned may be eaten, but the youth or girl
must then abstain from pork.

These examples, without entering into further details, will suffice to
show what is the nature of the aka-op period. During that period the
youth must abstain for a certain length of time from each one of the
more important foods of his community. After a certain period of
abstention he is permitted to eat the particular food. On each occasion
of thus eating a food for the first time after the abstention, there
are certain ritual customs that must be observed, and these customs are
more important in some cases (such as pig, turtle and honey) than in
others. In the case of some of the foods the only ritual observed is
that the food must be given by an older man, who is himself free to eat
it, that it must be eaten in silence, and that the man must be painted
afterwards with clay (odu). In the case of pork and turtle, however,
there are fairly elaborate ceremonies. The ceremonies are very similar
in different parts of the islands. The description given below applies
to the coast-dwellers of the North Andaman. In these communities the
period of abstention from turtle and other foods begins in the case of
a girl at the first menstruation, and in the case of a boy when his
back is cut. It may last only one year or several years, according to
circumstances, and is brought to a close by the turtle-eating ceremony.
The details of this are exactly the same in the case of a girl and a
boy.

When the older men decide that it is time for a boy who has been
abstaining from turtle to be released from the restriction, a
turtle-hunting expedition is arranged, and this is continued until a
fair number of good turtle are captured. The best of these is selected,
killed, and cooked. The youth is seated in a hut, either that of his
parents, or one placed at his disposal by a friend or one specially
built [56]. All his ornaments are removed. (In the case of a girl one
belt of Pandanus leaf is retained.) He is seated on leaves of the
Hibiscus tiliaceus, or if these be not obtainable, on those of the
Myristica longifolia, and a bundle of the same leaves is placed under
his folded arms so as to cover his belly, while another bundle is
placed at his back where there is some sort of rest provided for him to
lean against. He must sit still with folded arms and with legs
stretched out in front, the two big toes clasping each other. He sits
facing towards the open sea, and a fire is placed near him, generally
just beyond his feet.

Some man is chosen to take charge of the ceremony. This may be one of
the older men of the community to which the youth belongs or a
distinguished visitor, if there be any such present in the camp at the
time. This man selects some of the meat and fat of the cooked turtle,
placing them in a wooden dish. He comes to where the youth is seated,
while the friends and relatives gather round. Taking some of the fat he
rubs it first over the lips and then over the whole body of the youth,
while the female relatives of the latter sit near and weep loudly. When
the youth’s body is thoroughly covered with fat the man who is
performing the ceremony takes some burnt oxide of iron, such as is used
for making red paint, and rubs it over the youth’s whole body, except
the hair of his head. He then takes a piece of turtle fat and places it
in the youth’s mouth, feeding him thus with a few mouthfuls which the
youth eats in silence. At this point the weeping of the relatives is
taken up again with renewed vigour and then gradually comes to an end.
Having fed the youth the man then proceeds to massage him. He first
stands behind him and placing his hands on his shoulders presses down
on them with all his weight. Then he seizes a roll of flesh on each
side of the youth’s belly and shakes it up and down as though to shake
down what has been eaten. The arms are next massaged and the wrists and
knuckles are forcibly flexed so as to make the joints “crack.” The legs
are similarly massaged, either with the hands or with the feet, the
performer (in the latter case) standing on the outstretched legs of the
youth and rolling the muscles beneath his feet [57]. The joints of the
toes are forcibly bent with the hand to make them “crack” if possible.
A mixture of clay (odu) and water has been prepared in a wooden dish.
The performer dips his hands into this and spatters it over the youth’s
body from head to foot, either by holding his hands near the youth and
clapping them together, or by jerking the clay off his fingers with a
flicking motion. During the whole of these proceedings the youth sits
passive and silent.

The first part of the ceremony is now over. The food tray containing
turtle meat and fat, cut into small pieces, is placed beside the youth
and he is provided with a skewer of the wood of the Hibiscus tiliaceus,
as he may not touch the meat with his fingers. He must sit in the same
position with legs outstretched and arms folded and surrounded with
Hibiscus leaves. To feed himself he may unloose one arm, and when his
legs are cramped he may double them up beneath him. He may not lie down
nor speak nor sleep for 48 hours. During this period he may eat nothing
but turtle and drink nothing but water [58]. The man in charge of the
ceremony sits behind him and gives him instructions as to what foods he
may and what he may not eat after the ceremony. Some of the men and
women take it in turn to sit beside the youth, attending to his wants
and talking or singing to keep him awake.

On the morning of the third day a belt and necklace are made of pieces
of the creeper called terkobito-balo, i.e. “centipede creeper” (Pothos
scandens), and these are placed round the youth’s waist and neck. On
this day he is permitted to sleep. Either on the same day, or early the
next morning, he has a bath in the sea, to remove some of the red paint
and clay, and he is then decorated with red paint made of red ochre and
turtle fat, and with white clay (to̱l-odu). The red paint is put on in
stripes over his body, and his ears are daubed with it. The white clay
is put on in a zig-zag pattern to be described later, the lines of
white clay alternating with those of red paint. This decoration is done
by female relatives.

Early on the morning of the fourth day, soon after daybreak, the whole
village is astir. One of the older men takes his stand by the
sounding-board used for marking time at dances, and the women sit down
near him. The youth comes out from his hut and stands in the middle of
the dancing ground, and five or six men stand round him in a circle,
each of them facing towards the youth. Each of the men, including the
youth, holds in each hand a bundle of twigs of the Hibiscus tiliaceus
or, if such be not obtainable, of the Myristica longifolia. The man at
the sounding-board sings a song, beating time with his foot, in the
usual way, on the sounding-board, and at the chorus the women join in
and mark the time by clapping their hands on their thighs. The song may
be on any subject and is selected by the singer from his own repertory.
A song referring to turtle-hunting is preferred. During the first song
the dancers stand at their positions on the dancing ground, lifting up
their leaf bundles at short intervals and bringing them down against
their knees. The singer then commences a new song or repeats the former
one, and when the song comes to an end the youth and those with him
begin their dance. Each dancer flexes his hips so that his back is
nearly horizontal. He raises his hands to the back of his neck so that
the two bundles of leaves in his hands rest on his back. With knees
flexed he leaps from the ground with both feet, keeping time to the
beating of the sounding-board, which is about 144 beats to the minute.
At the end of every eight jumps or so, the dancer brings his hands
forwards, downwards and backwards, giving a vigorous sweep with the
bundles of leaves, which scrape the ground at each side of his feet,
and then brings back the bundles to their former position. They dance
thus for 15 or 30 seconds and then pause to rest. The dance is repeated
several times, until the youth is tired out. As the dance is extremely
fatiguing this does not take long [59].

The youth then returns to his hut and resumes his former position. He
may now, if he wishes, talk to his friends and he may sleep. He must
retain the bundles of Hibiscus leaves and the necklace and belt of
Pothos leaves. The dance is sometimes repeated in the afternoon. It is
in any case repeated on each of the two days following, and after that
the youth resumes his ordinary life. For a week or two he may not touch
a bow and arrow. The Pothos leaves are worn till they are faded and are
then discarded. The paint on the body wears off and is not renewed, but
his ears are kept painted with red paint. For some weeks the youth is
supposed to be in an abnormal condition and is carefully watched by his
friends.

At the turtle-eating ceremony a new name is given to the youth. This
name, however, never seems to be used afterwards either in speaking of
or to the person to whom it belongs. A youth of the Aka-J̌eru tribe
whose birth name was Čop (from a species of tree) and whose nick-name
or second name was Komar (from a species of fish) had two new names
given to him on the occasion of the turtle-eating ceremony, Čokbi-čiro
(meaning turtle-liver) and Pilečar (high-tide). Neither of these names
was ever used in addressing him.

The turtle-eating ceremony is called in the Northern tribes either
Čokbi-ǰo, Čokbi-kimil, or Kimil-ǰo. The word čokbi means “turtle,” and
ǰo means “eating.” The word kimil is more difficult to translate. With
the prefix ot- or er- it means “hot” as in T’ ot-kimil-bom, “I am hot.”
From the time of the commencement of the ceremony the youth or girl is
said to be in a condition denoted by the word aka-kimil. During this
time, i.e. during the ceremony and for some months afterwards, he or
she is not addressed or spoken of by name but is referred to as
“Kimil,” the word being thus used as a term of address or a substitute
for the personal name. A person who is in this condition is described
as aka-kimil-kolo̱t. (Before the ceremony the youth is oko-taliŋ-kolo̱t
and the girl is aka-ndu-kolo̱t.) In the Aka-Bea tribe the turtle-eating
ceremony is called Yadi-gumul or Gumul-leke, yadi being the word for
“turtle” in that language, and leke being the equivalent of the ǰo of
Aka-J̌eru, that is “eating.” A youth or girl who is passing or has
recently passed through the ceremony is said to be aka-gumul, and is
addressed and spoken of, not by name, but by the term Guma [60].

In the coast-dwelling communities of the Northern tribes, the youth or
girl who has passed through the turtle-eating ceremony is thereafter
free to eat turtle flesh (though not the liver nor the intestinal fat
of the turtle) and a certain number of the other foods that were
previously forbidden. On the other hand, he or she is now forbidden to
eat pork and a number of other foods which previously were permitted.
The period during which these new prohibitions are in force may last
for a few months or for a year or even longer. It is, however,
generally shorter than the first period of abstention from turtle. It
is brought to an end by a pig-eating ceremony which is similar in many
ways to the turtle-eating ceremony already described. A boar must be
killed if the initiate be a youth, or a sow if it be a girl who is to
go through the ceremony. The youth is seated in a hut on leaves of the
čelmo (Tetranthera) and the carcase of the boar is brought and pressed
upon the youth’s shoulders and back by one of the men. The girl is not
treated in this way. The pork is then cooked and the youth is first
anointed and then fed with some of the fat. He is then rubbed with red
ochre, massaged and splashed with clay, just as in the turtle-eating
ceremony. He must sit silent with arms crossed, and covered with
Tetranthera leaves for a day and a night. During this time he may only
eat pork, and must not touch his food with his hands but must use a
skewer of Tetranthera wood. On the following day he is decorated with
white clay (to̱l-odu) and with red paint, and takes part in a dance. The
dance is almost exactly the same as the dance on the occasion of the
turtle-eating ceremony, the only differences being that instead of
Hibiscus leaves those of the Tetranthera are used, and that the dancer
does not leap with both feet from the ground, but raises one foot and
stamps with it.

In the Northern tribes these are the two most important ceremonies.
After the pig-eating ceremony the youth is free to eat pork and a
certain number of previously forbidden foods. There remain a
considerable number of foods, however, which he is still forbidden. In
connection with each of these there is some sort of minor ceremony. The
older men, when occasion arises, offer the youth or girl some of the
forbidden food, first rubbing it over his or her mouth. The food is
then eaten in silence. I only saw one such ceremony, when a man ate for
the first time after his abstention the intestinal fat of the turtle.
The man was about 24 years of age and had long since been through the
chief ceremonies, and was married. The ceremony is perhaps more
elaborate in the case of the similar first eating of honey, dugong and
a few other foods. One after another of the food prohibitions is
removed until the man or woman is free to eat anything. There is no
regular order in which this takes place, as in each case it is
determined by chance circumstances. The only order that is rigorously
observed is that of the two chief ceremonies connected with pork and
turtle. These two are the principal meat foods of the coast-dwellers.

The above description applies strictly only to the coast-dwellers of
the North Andaman (Aka-Čari, Aka-J̌eru and Aka-Ko̱ra). I was not able to
see any ceremonies performed by the jungle-dwellers. The old men of the
Aka-Bo tribe told me that the period of abstention begins when a boy or
girl is forbidden to eat the fish ńyuri (Plotosus sp., probably P.
arab), and a certain number of other foods, not including pork. The
first ceremony is the eating of the ńyuri. The boy or girl is seated on
leaves (kibir or tare or ra-čiro) and bundles of these are placed in
his belt before and behind. A belt of Pandanus leaf is worn by the boys
at this ceremony as well as by the girls. The initiate sits with his
legs doubled up beneath him, and is fed with the fish. The ceremony
lasts only one day. There is no special dance, but the initiate joins
in an ordinary dance at the end of the ceremony, being decorated for
this purpose with white clay. After this ceremony the youth must
abstain from pork and other foods. The pig-eating ceremony, which
closes this period of abstention, lasts altogether for three or four
days, the initiate remaining awake for one night. The leaves used are
the same as those of the first (fish-eating) ceremony. The third
important ceremony of these communities is the honey-eating. The
initiate sits cross-legged and honey is rubbed over his or her
shoulders and chest, and he or she is fed with it.

I was told by one of my informants that in the Aka-Kede tribe the
pig-eating ceremony precedes the turtle-eating, but I could not obtain
reliable information about the ceremonies of this tribe.

My informants of the Akar-Bale tribe, which consists of coast-dwelling
communities only, told me that the period of abstention begins with
turtle, honey, turtle’s eggs, yams, and a number of fruits and seeds.
This period lasts for three or four years. Then comes the turtle-eating
ceremony, which is said to be similar in its details to that already
described from the North Andaman. After this ceremony the initiate may
not eat dugong, porpoise and a considerable number of fishes (including
Tetrodon sp., Plotosus sp., Anguilla bengalensis, Trygon bleekari, T.
siphen, Urogymnus asperrimus, Carcharias gangeticus, etc.). He must
also abstain from turtle’s eggs, pig, yams, honey, and certain fruits
(e.g. Artocarpus chaplasha, Mimusops littoralis, Baccaurea sapida,
etc.). A few months after the turtle-eating ceremony there is a minor
ceremony of eating turtle’s eggs, the eggs being eaten in silence and
the meal followed by a dance. After another period follows the ceremony
of eating pig’s kidney-fat. Then, as opportunity occurs, the initiate
eats dugong, honey and the other forbidden foods, one after another.
The ceremony in each case is not elaborate except in connection with
such important foods as dugong and honey.

Mr E. H. Man has given a description of the ceremonies of the Aka-Bea
tribe, which shows that they are essentially similar to those of the
North. He does not distinguish between the ceremonies of the aryoto
(coast-dwellers) and those of the eremtaga (jungle-dwellers). He states
that the fasting period (aka-yaba) is divided into three parts, the
first ending with the yadi- (turtle) gumul, the second with the aǰa-
(honey) gumul, and the third with the reg-ǰiri- (kidney-fat of pig)
gumul.

As I was not able to witness the honey-eating ceremony, I venture to
reproduce below the description that Mr Man gives of this ceremony as
it is conducted in the Aka-Bea tribe.

“When the honey fast is to be broken a quantity of honeycombs,
according to the number assembled, are on the appointed day procured:
the aka-yab being placed in the midst of the group, the chief or other
elder goes to him with a large honeycomb wrapped in leaves; after
helping the novice to a large mouthful, which he does by means of a
bamboo or iron knife, he presents the remainder to him, and then leaves
him to devour it in silence: this he does, not, however, by the
ordinary method, for it is an essential part of the ceremony that he
should not use his fingers to break off pieces, but eat it
bear-fashion, by holding the comb up to his mouth and attacking it with
his teeth and lips. After satisfying his present requirements, he wraps
what is left of the comb in leaves for later consumption. The chief
then takes another comb and anoints the youth by squeezing it over his
head, rubbing the honey well into his body as it trickles down. The
proceedings at this stage are interrupted by a bath, in order to remove
all traces of the honey, which would otherwise be a source of
considerable inconvenience by attracting ants. Beyond the observance of
silence, and continued abstention from reg-ǰiri (pig’s kidney-fat), the
youth is under no special restrictions, being able to eat, drink and
sleep as much as he pleases. Early the following morning the lad
decorates himself with leaves of a species of Alpinia, called ǰini
[61], and then, in the presence of his friends, goes into the sea (or,
if he be an eremtaga, into a creek) up to his waist, where, locking his
thumbs together, he splashes as much water as possible over himself and
the by-standers, occasionally ducking his head under the surface as
well. This is considered a safeguard or charm against snakes, and the
onlookers cry “o̱to-pedike, kinig wara-ǰobo lo̱tike” (Go and splash
yourself, or Wara-ǰobo [62] will get inside you), for they imagine that
unless they go through this splashing performance, this snake will by
some means enter their stomachs and so cause death. The only difference
between the sexes with respect to the aǰa-gumul is that with females it
cannot take place until after the birth of the first child; they are
also required to abstain from honey during each subsequent pregnancy;
and in their case, too, a chief or elder (preferably a relative)
officiates, and not a woman [63].”

We may now proceed to the ritual customs connected with death and
burial. In all the Great Andaman tribes disease and death are supposed
to be due to the spirits of the jungle and the sea. The subject will be
dealt with in the next chapter.

On the occurrence of a death the news quickly spreads through the camp,
and all the women collect round the body and, sitting down, weep loudly
until they are exhausted. The women then retire and the men come and
weep over the corpse. All the adult members of the community then
proceed to cover themselves with a wash of common clay smeared evenly
over their bodies and limbs. This clay is of the kind called odu in
Aka-J̌eru and og in Aka-Bea. The nearer relatives and more intimate
friends of the deceased also plaster some of the same clay on their
heads.

Some of the women, generally, but not necessarily, relatives, remove
any ornaments the dead person may have been wearing, shave the head and
decorate the body. This decoration consists of lines of fine pattern in
white clay alternating with bands of red paint. A band of red paint is
placed across the upper lip passing from ear to ear and the ears
themselves are smeared with the pigment. The greater the estimation in
which the deceased person is held the greater is the care lavished upon
this the last decoration.

Thus decorated the body is prepared for burial. The legs and arms are
flexed so that the knees come up under the chin and the fists rest
against the cheeks. A Cyrena shell (or sometimes in these days a steel
knife) is placed in the closed hand. A sleeping mat is wrapped round
the body, and over this a number of the large palm leaves known as ko̱bo
(Aka-J̌eru) are arranged and the whole is made into a bundle and tied up
with rope. Before the ropes are all tied the relatives of the dead
person take their last farewell by gently blowing on the face of the
corpse.

The male relatives and friends then proceed to the spot selected for
the burial, one of them carrying the corpse slung on his back. If the
burial place can be reached by canoe, no hesitation is shown in making
use of a canoe for the purpose. There are not, so far as could be
discovered, any rules as to which of the men shall undertake the
burial. Such relatives as brother, father, son or husband generally
take the leading part. The women take no part in the actual burial.
There are two modes of disposing of the body, in a grave dug in the
ground, or upon a platform placed in a tree. The latter is considered
the more honourable form of burial, and is only adopted in the case of
a man or woman dying in the prime of life. The same grave is not used
twice, in the case of interment, though a new grave may be made close
to an old one. The natives said that the same tree might be used
several times for platform-burial, but there was no opportunity of
proving this statement. There are not, generally speaking, any regular
burying grounds. Any convenient spot may be chosen so long as it is at
some little distance from the camp. It does happen, however, that
certain spots are fairly regularly used. In the case of one burial that
I witnessed the spot chosen was about a mile distant from the camp, the
journey being made in a canoe, and there were already five or six
graves at the same place.

In the case of interment a hole is dug three or four feet in depth, the
digging being done with an adze and a digging stick, and sometimes a
wooden dish is used to scoop out the soil. The body is placed in the
hole and the ropes tied round it are severed. The body is placed
slightly on its side facing the east. I asked some of the natives the
reason for this orientation, and was told that if the custom were not
observed the sun would not rise and the world would be left in
darkness. A pillow of wood is placed under the head, and a log of wood
at each side of the corpse. Sometimes some object that has been worn by
the deceased, such as a belt or necklace, is placed in the grave. The
soil is then replaced, all present helping. Beside the grave a fire is
lighted and some water contained in a bamboo vessel or in a nautilus
shell is left for the corpse. In some cases the bow belonging to the
deceased, if it be a man, and a few arrows are placed on the grave. In
the Aka-Čari tribe a harpoon and line are substituted for the bow and
arrows, and a bamboo harpoon shaft is erected vertically in the grave
near the right hand of the body. In the same tribe it is usual to
suspend near the grave a bundle of the prepared fibre of Anadendron
paniculatum such as is used for making thread. There are probably
slight variations of custom in this respect in different tribes or even
in different cases in the same tribe.

In the case of platform-burial a platform of sticks is erected in a
tree, twelve feet or so above the ground, and the body is placed
thereon, lying sideways facing the east. Water and fire are placed
beneath the tree. Mr Man states that in cases of tree-burial they are
careful not to select a fruit tree or one of a species used for the
manufacture of their canoes, bows and other implements. Such natives as
I questioned on this point said that this was not so and that they
would use any suitable tree whether one that was useful or not. I was
unable definitely to prove the point, as I did not see a single
instance of tree-burial during my stay in the islands. A tree that is
sometimes used for this purpose is the Ficus laccifera, which as we
have seen has a special connection with the spirits of new-born
children. On the coast, mangrove trees, such as the Rhizophora or
Bruguiera, are said to be used.

When the burial is completed, whether in a grave or a tree, plumes made
of shredded palm-leaf stem koro (Aka-J̌eru) or ara (Aka-Bea) are
attached near the graves to the branches of trees or shrubs or to
sticks put up for the purpose. This is done, it is said, to show any
native, who might inadvertently approach, that there has been a burial
at the spot. The undergrowth is cleared for a short distance round the
grave.

The men then return to the camp, where the women have been busy packing
up all belongings. Plumes of shredded palm-leaf stem (koro) are put up
at the entrance to the camp, to show chance visitors that there has
been a death. The camp is then deserted, the natives moving to some
other camping ground until the period of mourning is over, when they
may, if they wish, return to the deserted village. No one goes near the
grave again until the period of mourning is over.

In the case of very young children the burial ceremony is different.
There is no general mourning of the whole camp. Only the father and
mother and a few other relatives weep over the dead body. The head of
the corpse is shaved and the body is decorated in the same way as that
of an adult. The body is wrapped up in palm leaves (Licuala), the limbs
being flexed. The fire is then removed from its customary place and a
grave is dug there in the floor of the hut. In this the child’s body is
placed, the grave is filled in and the fire replaced above it. Not only
is the camp not deserted, but there seems to be an obligation on the
parents not to leave the place until the bones have been dug up, or at
any rate for some weeks after the death. If the mother went away, the
natives say, the baby would cry for its mother’s milk. This is the
custom of the Northern tribes. Referring to the Southern tribes, Mr Man
says that the baby is buried beneath the fireplace and the camp is then
deserted, the mother placing beside the grave a shell containing some
milk squeezed from her breasts. Some of my informants of the Southern
tribes (Akar-Bale, etc.) told me however that the camp would not be
deserted in the case of the death of an infant, thus contradicting Mr
Man’s statement. As there was no opportunity of testing the point by
reference to an actual case, it must be left as doubtful. In the
Northern tribes when an older child dies the body is buried away from
the camp, but the latter is not, at any rate in all instances,
deserted, though the hut in which the death occurred may be destroyed
and a new one built a short distance away. It is only in the case of
the death of an adult that the camp is abandoned.

In connection with the burial of a baby beneath the hearth there is a
belief that the soul of the dead baby may re-enter the mother and be
born again. This would seem to be one of the reasons why the mother
does not leave the camp when her baby dies.

Should a person die while on a visit, he or she is buried in the usual
way and news of the death and place of burial is sent to the relatives.
A stranger who dies or is killed is buried unceremoniously or is cast
into the sea. Among the Northern tribes the body of such a one used in
former days to be disposed of by cutting it into pieces and burning it
on a fire. The natives say that if this be done the ‘blood’ and the
‘fat’ of the dead man go up to the sky and this removes all danger to
the living from the dead man. The blood of persons so burnt is seen in
the sky at sunset. If a man were killed in a fight between two
communities and his body remained with the enemy, they would dispose of
it in this way. If the friends secured the body they would bury it in
the usual way. It may be worthy of remark that this custom of burning
the bodies of slain enemies is perhaps the real origin of the belief
that the Andamanese are or were cannibals. We can well imagine that
when, as must have often happened, sailors venturing to land on the
islands have been killed and the survivors have seen the bodies of
their companions cut up and placed on fires, they would readily
conclude that they were witnessing a cannibal feast. There can be no
doubt whatever that since the islands were occupied in 1858 the
inhabitants have not practised cannibalism, and there is no good reason
to suppose that they once followed the custom and then abandoned it.

The burial is conducted, if possible, on the day of the death. If it
has to be deferred till the morrow all the inhabitants of the camp keep
awake. The relatives sit round the corpse weeping at intervals, while
some of the men take it in turn to sing songs during the hours of
darkness. This, so they say, is to keep away the spirits that have
caused the death, and so prevent them from further mischief. When a man
or woman dies in the prime of life after a short illness the friends
and relatives often break out in anger which they express in different
ways. A man will shout threats and curses at the spirits that he
conceives to be responsible for the death of his friend. He may pick up
his bow and discharge his arrows in all directions, or in some other
way give expression to his angry feelings. On the occasion of a death
in one of the Akar-Bale villages the relatives expressed their grief by
cutting down a coconut tree that grew there.

The period of mourning for near relatives—parent, adult child, consort,
brother or sister—lasts for several months. In the case of a young
child only the parents mourn. The essentials of mourning are (1) the
use of clay (odu), and (2) abstention from certain foods, from dancing,
and from the use of white clay (to̱l) and red paint. As stated above,
every adult in the camp covers himself or herself with clay on the
death of an adult member of the community, but when this wears off, or
is washed off in the course of two or three days, it is not renewed.
The near relatives retain this covering of clay for many weeks,
constantly renewing it. The clay is smeared evenly over the body, and
is not put on in patterns, as on other occasions. The relatives, but
not the others, plaster some of the same clay on their heads. A widow
mourning for her husband covers her whole head with a thick layer of
clay, renewing it from time to time. For a lesser degree of mourning,
the custom is to plaster clay on the forehead only. After some weeks or
months of mourning, the near relatives discontinue the use of clay on
their bodies, but retain a band of clay over the forehead as shown in
Plates IX, X, and XVII.

The name of the clay thus used is odu in the Northern languages, and a
mourner is called aka-odu. In the Aka-Bea language the name of the clay
is og and the term for a mourner is aka-og.

During the period of mourning the name of the dead person is carefully
avoided and no one uses it. If it is necessary to refer to the dead
this is done by using some such phrase as “he who is buried by the big
rock” or “he who is laid in the fig tree” or by mentioning the name of
the place of burial. There is no prohibition against mentioning the
name itself in other connections. Thus if a man were called Buio, from
the name of a species of Mucuna, it is not necessary to avoid the word
buio when speaking of the plant. Further if there is another person
alive of the same name as the dead man it is not necessary to avoid the
name in referring to the living individual. The custom is that a dead
person must not be spoken of unless it is absolutely necessary, and
then must not be spoken of by name. After the period of mourning is
over the dead person may again be spoken of by name.

During the period of mourning a near relative of the deceased is never
addressed or spoken of by name. There are certain terms which are used
for this purpose, being terms of address that can be substituted for
the names that are avoided. Thus in the Aka-J̌eru language one such term
is Bolok, meaning “orphan,” used in addressing or speaking of a person
who has lately lost a parent. Another term of the same language is
Ropuč, applicable to one who has lost a brother or sister. After the
period of mourning is over the use of the personal name of the mourner
is resumed.

During the period of mourning the near relatives of the deceased are
required by custom to abstain from dancing and from using red paint or
white clay. The white clay here referred to is that called to̱l or
to̱l-odu in Aka-J̌eru and tala-og in Aka-Bea, and is used for decorating
the body on ceremonial occasions, such as that of a big dance. Further,
the mourners must abstain from eating certain foods. The customs with
regard to the foods to be avoided are different in different parts.
There is however the universal rule that coast-dwellers must not eat
turtle, and jungle-dwellers must avoid pork. Other foods that are
included amongst those to be avoided are dugong, certain fishes such as
that called komar in Aka-J̌eru, and in some parts yams and honey.

The exact duration of the period of mourning is difficult to discover.
It seems to vary considerably in different cases. In all cases it must
last long enough for the flesh to decay from the bones. The proceedings
at the end of mourning consist of (1) digging up the bones of the dead
man or woman and (2) a dance in which all the mourners join. The bones
are generally dug up by the men who performed the burial. They cover
themselves with clay (odu) and proceed to the grave or tree and dig up
or take down the bones and weep over them. These are then washed in the
sea or a creek and are taken back to camp. Here they are received by
the women who weep over them in their turn. The skull and jawbone are
decorated with red paint and white clay, and each separately has a band
of ornamental netting attached to it so that it may be worn around the
neck. Additional ornament is frequently added in the form of strings of
Dentalium or other shells. The skulls and jawbones of deceased
relatives are preserved for a long time, and are worn round the neck
either in front or behind. The photograph in Plate XVIII shows a woman
wearing the skull of her deceased sister. Like all their other
possessions these relics are lent or exchanged, passing from one person
to another, until sometimes a skull may be found in the possession of a
man who does not know to whom it belonged. The other bones are also
preserved. The limb bones are generally painted with red paint and
white clay and are kept in the roof of the hut. They are not treasured
as much as the skull and jaw, and are often mislaid. Thus, while every
camp is sure to contain a number of skulls and jaw-bones it is
comparatively rarely that the limb bones are to be found. The other
bones are made into strings, such bones as those of the hand and foot
being used as they are, while ribs and vertebrae are broken up into
pieces of convenient size. The bones or pieces of bone are attached to
a length of rope by means of thread and the string thus produced is
often ornamented with the dried yellow skin of the Dendrobium and with
shells. The whole is covered with red paint. These strings of bone are
worn as cures for and preventives of illness. If a man has a head-ache,
for instance, he will attach one of the strings round his head. They
are in almost constant use in every camp and every man and woman is
sure to possess one or two. The bones are made into strings by the
female relatives of the deceased and are then given away as presents.

In the North Andaman the skull of a baby is preserved by enclosing it
in a small basket just big enough to contain it, the top of the basket,
which is narrower than the lower part, being only finished after the
skull is placed inside, so that it cannot fall out and can only be
removed by unfastening the rim of the basket. Mr Man states that
children’s skulls are not carried in baskets, except temporarily as
when travelling, fishing, etc., but are preserved from injury by being
entirely covered with string [64]. This applies only to the tribes of
the South and Middle Andaman.

At about the time that the bones are recovered there takes place a
special ceremony referred to as “taking off the clay” or “the shedding
of tears.” The object of this ceremony is to release the mourners from
the restrictions that they have had to observe. The ceremony takes
place in the evening, and an occasion is chosen when there are plenty
of people in the camp. The mourners, male and female, remove the odu
clay from their foreheads and decorate themselves with red paint and
white clay in the way described in connection with dancing. They also
put on what ornaments of Pandanus leaf or netting and Dentalium shell
they may possess or be able to borrow. When all the members of the camp
are assembled around the dancing ground one of the male mourners takes
his stand at the sounding-board and sings a song. This song does not
refer in any way to the dead man or woman; it is just an ordinary song
of hunting or canoe-cutting or any other subject, though it may have
been specially composed for the occasion. Those women who are not in
mourning sit near the singer and take up the chorus. When the song is
fairly started the mourners, male and female, begin to dance. There is
nothing special about the dance, which is exactly like any other dance.
After dancing for a short time the mourners seat themselves at one end
of the dancing ground and their friends begin to weep and wail.
Everybody present joins in the lamentation until they are tired. The
mourners then rise and again dance. After a time the women retire and
seat themselves with the chorus, but the men continue the dance (in
which they are joined by the other men present), till they are tired,
which often means till near dawn. After this ceremony the mourners are
free to eat any of the foods up till then forbidden, and are free once
more to use red paint and white clay and to take their part in all
dances and other festivities.

It has been seen from the preceding descriptions that the Andamanese
have a number of ritual customs relating to food. There are certain
occasions in the life of every individual when he or she must abstain
from eating certain foods. A person mourning for the death of a
relative is subjected to restrictions of this kind, and so are the
parents of a new-born child for a short period before and after the
birth. A woman must not eat certain things when she is menstruating.
Restrictions as to diet are imposed by custom on all persons who are
ill. The most important restrictions, however, are those imposed on
every boy and girl during the period of adolescence. During this period
of life, as we have seen, the initiate is required to abstain for a
longer or shorter period from all the most important foods of the
Andamanese.

Mr Man states that “every Andamanese man or woman is prohibited all
through life from eating some one (or more) fish or animal: in most
cases the forbidden dainty is one which in childhood was observed (or
imagined) by the mother to occasion some functional derangement; when
of an age to understand it the circumstance is explained, and cause and
effect being clearly demonstrated, the individual in question
thenceforth considers that particular meat his yat-tub, and avoids it
carefully. In cases where no evil consequences have resulted from
partaking of any kind of food, the fortunate person is privileged to
select his own yat-tub, and is of course shrewd enough to decide upon
some fish, such as shark or skate, which is little relished, and to
abstain from which consequently entails no exercise of self-denial
[65].”

Although I made repeated enquiries amongst the natives of both the
North and the South Andaman I was not able to confirm this observation
of Mr Man. It is quite true that if a certain food is observed to
disagree with a child he or she is taught to avoid that food for the
rest of life, but it is not necessary for every person to have some
forbidden food. Many men told me that they were under no such
prohibition and might eat any food they liked, apart from the
restrictions on special occasions. On a minor point it may be noted
that skate and even shark are not by any means so little relished as
the statement of Mr Man would imply. The liver of skates and rays, and
even the liver of sharks is rather regarded as a delicacy.

I noticed on several occasions that men would not eat certain foods
when they were away from their own part of the islands. Thus one man of
the North Andaman told me that he would not eat dugong when he was with
me in the South Andaman. Another said that though he would eat the fish
komar when he was at home, he would not eat it when he was in a strange
place, as at the Settlement of Port Blair, for fear that it would make
him ill.

In the North Andaman I was told that when a dugong is caught and the
people feast on it they do not leave the camp till some hours after the
meat is all finished, either to go fishing or hunting. The reason they
give for this is that the spirits of the jungle and the sea may smell
them, attracted by the odour of the food they have eaten and may cause
them to be ill. They therefore remain in the camp and eat up all the
dugong and do not venture out till they begin to feel hungry and must
go in search of food. I believe that the same custom is observed in the
South Andaman also.

A few other customs connected with food may be mentioned here. There is
only one way in which a turtle may be killed [66]. It must be laid on
its back with its head pointing towards the open sea, and a skewer of
wood is then thrust through the eye-socket into the brain. The natives
say that if a turtle were killed in any other way than this, the meat
would be “bad,” i.e., uneatable.

Turtle meat may only be cooked on a fire of the wood of the Hibiscus
tiliaceus.

A pig is killed as it runs, without ceremony, but there is one special
way in which it must be cut up. The pig is first disembowelled, and the
joints of the legs are severed. The abdominal cavity is then filled
with leaves, of which only certain special kinds are used. It is placed
on a fire and roasted whole, and is then cut up. Should the carcase be
cut up by any other than the traditional method, the natives believe
that the meat would be “bad,” and they would not eat it.

A number of beliefs relating to vegetable foods will be mentioned in
the next chapter.

In several of the ceremonies described in this chapter it will be
noticed that the weeping of relatives and friends occurs as an
essential part of the ceremony. The female relatives of a youth or girl
who is being initiated come and weep over him or her at the
turtle-eating ceremony. Their friends weep over, or with, the mourners
at the dance at the end of mourning. The friends of a bride and
bridegroom weep over them when they are married. The friends and
relatives weep over a corpse before it is buried and over the bones
when they are recovered. In all cases it is real weeping. The man or
woman sits down and wails or howls, and the tears stream down his or
her face. On one occasion I asked the natives to show how it was done
and two or three of them sat down and were immediately weeping real
tears at my request. The weeping in this way is really a ceremony or
rite. When two friends or relatives meet who have been separated from
one another for a few weeks or longer, they greet each other by sitting
down, one on the lap of the other, with their arms around each other’s
necks, and weeping and wailing for two or three minutes till they are
tired. Two brothers greet each other in this way, and so do father and
son, mother and son, mother and daughter, and husband and wife. When
husband and wife meet, it is the man who sits on the lap of the woman.
When two friends part from one another, one of them lifts up the hand
of the other towards his mouth and gently blows on it.

Reference has already been made in this chapter to a number of customs
relating to personal names. It will be useful to bring together the
scattered references, and give a general account of the whole matter.

Every Andaman Islander has a personal name that is given to him or her
before birth, and which we may speak of as the birth-name. As soon as a
woman realises that she is pregnant, she and her husband begin to think
of a name for the child. The name is selected by the parents, but the
suggestions of their friends and relatives are always considered. It is
regarded as a compliment to name the child after some man or woman.
Sometimes a man may request the parents that the child shall be named
after him, and such a request is rarely, if ever, refused. The names
given before birth are of course applicable to both sexes, there being
no difference between the names of men and those of women. There are a
considerable number of names in common use, but some of them are more
popular at a given time and place than others. It therefore happens
that there are several persons, both men and women, bearing the same
name.

Each of the names in common use has a meaning, but it is not always
easy to obtain an adequate and accurate explanation of the meaning from
the natives themselves [67]. In a certain number the derivation is
obvious. Many names are the names of objects such as trees, fish or
other animals, or even such objects as rope or mats. A few examples
from the North Andaman are:—


            Buio     Mucuna sp., a plant with edible beans.
            Bol      Hibiscus tiliaceus.
            Čop      a tree with edible nuts.
            Ko̱nmo    Dioscorea sp.
            Čokbi    turtle.
            Maro     honey.
            Meo      a stone.
            Čeo      a knife.
            Bani     the oriole.


In the case of a number of names it is not possible to discover with
certainty the derivation, and the statements of the natives regarding
them do not always agree. Such names in the North Andaman, with their
meanings as stated by the natives, are:—


            Kea       one who turns in his sleep.
            Bo̱ičo     one who wrestles.
            Elpe      one who comes and goes.
            Kiǰe̱ri    one who walks backwards and forwards.
            Nimi      one who catches hold.


Some time after a child is born it is given a nick-name. Nick-names may
be given at any time of life, and some persons may have several
nick-names given to them at different times. New nick-names are from
time to time invented, but there are a certain number of recognized
names from which a choice is usually made. A few examples from the
North Andaman are:—


    Ra-t’ot-betč   pig’s hair.
    Renya-čope     much baggage, or many possessions.
    Po̱ičo-tomo     the wood (literally flesh) of the Sterculia
                   (po̱ičo) tree.
    Lau-tei        spirit blood.
    Luremo         rope.
    Remu-to̱i       a piece of iron.
    Čokbi-čiro     turtle liver.
    Tarenǰek       angry.


During childhood boys and girls are addressed by either the birth-name
or the nick-name.

When a girl reaches the age of puberty she receives a new name. This is
one of a limited number of names, each of which is the name of a tree
or plant. The name given to the girl is that of the tree or plant that
is in flower at the time of her first menstruation.

There is a succession of trees and plants flowering one after another
throughout the year. The natives describe the different parts of the
year by reference to the plants in flower at the time. The plants
selected as typical of the different seasons all have flowers from
which the native bees make honey. Each of them has a distinctive scent
and gives to the honey made from it a distinctive flavour. The
flower-names are given below in Aka-Bea and Aka-J̌eru.


    Aka-Bea   Aka-J̌eru

    Čilipa    Čelibi    From the middle of November to the middle of
                        February.
    Moda      Mukui   }
    Ora       Oko̱r    }
    Jidga             } From the middle of February to the middle of
    Yere      J̌eru   } May, in order.
    Pataka    Bo̱tek   }
    Balya     Puliu   }

    Reče      Re      } From the middle of May to the end of August.
    Čagara    Čokoro  }

    Čarapa    Čarap   } September, October and the first half of
    Čenra     To̱ro̱k?  } November.
    Yulu      J̌ili   }


From the time that a girl receives her flower-name her birth-name and
nick-name fall entirely out of use. No one would address an unmarried
girl by any name except the flower-name. This continues until some time
after the girl is married. Properly speaking a woman should be known by
her flower-name from the advent of puberty until after the birth of her
first child. In these days of childless women the flower-name drops out
of use after a few years of married life. After the birth of her first
child the woman is known by her birth-name or by a nick-name. Thus a
woman who was named before her birth Kaba (from kabal, a species of
mangrove) was called by that name until puberty; thereafter she was
called J̌ili (her flower-name) until the birth of her first child; after
this event she is again called Kaba, and no one would think of
addressing her as J̌ili. A woman named Ele (lightning) at birth was
known by this name until puberty, and thereafter was called Bo̱tek. When
I knew her she had been married for three years or so, but had not had
a child. A few of the younger men and women addressed her as Ele, but
the older people still called her Bo̱tek. If she should bear a child,
the name Bo̱tek would fall entirely out of use and she would be known as
Ele by both her juniors and her seniors.

In the case of a boy there is nothing corresponding to the flower-names
of girls. He continues to be known by his birth-name and his nick-name
from the time he is born until he dies. During adolescence a youth has
to pass through certain ceremonies of initiation as described in the
present chapter. At the turtle-eating ceremony the youth is given a new
name, of the nature of a nick-name. The name given in this way is never
used either in addressing the youth or in speaking of him. It is
possible that he also receives a new name on the occasion of the
pig-eating ceremony, but of this I am not sure. Though girls pass
through the same ceremonies as boys, I did not discover whether or not
they also are given new names on these occasions.

Names are used freely in speaking of and to one another. An older
person always speaks of or to the younger one by the name alone. When a
younger person is speaking to an older one it is customary and polite
to use one of the terms of address, either by itself, or prefixed to
the name of the person spoken to, as Maia Buio, Mimi Kaba, etc. A
native generally hesitates to tell his own name, and if asked the
question “What is your name?” often asks a bystander to give the
required information. There is, however, no hesitation about mentioning
the name of any other person, except under certain special conditions.

There are certain occasions when the name of a man or woman is
temporarily avoided. After the death of a relative and during the
period of mourning, a mourner’s name is not mentioned, either in
speaking to him or of him. There are a few terms that may be used
instead. One who has lost a parent is addressed as Bolok, one who has
lost a brother or sister as Ropuč. For a short time before and after
the birth of a child the names of the father and mother are not
mentioned. A bride and bridegroom are not addressed or spoken of by
name for a short period after their marriage, though if their names be
A and B there seems to be no harm in referring to A as “the husband of
B,” or to B as “the wife of A.” During the initiation ceremonies
through which every boy and girl must pass, the name of the initiate is
avoided. Thus on the occasion of the turtle-eating ceremony or the
pig-eating ceremony, during the few days the ceremony lasts and for a
few weeks afterwards, the youth or girl is never addressed or spoken of
by name, but is referred to as Kimil. During the ceremony that takes
place on the occasion of the advent of puberty, and for some weeks
after, a girl is not spoken of or to either by her birth-name or her
flower-name, but is called Toto. When a boy, in the Northern tribes,
has the scars made on his back, which show him to be no longer a child,
his name is avoided for a few weeks and he is called Eǰido.

The name of a dead man or woman is not mentioned during the period of
mourning, which lasts for some months after the death.

In the preceding portions of the chapter reference has been made
several times to the ornamentation of the body with clay and pigment.
In the Great Andaman three different substances are used for painting
the body. These are (1) a common clay of which different specimens are
gray, yellow or pink, called odu in Aka-J̌eru and og in Aka-Bea; (2) a
fine white pipe-clay which is rarer than the common clay and is more
highly prized, called to̱l or to̱l-odu in Aka-J̌eru and tala-og in
Aka-Bea; (3) a red pigment made by mixing burnt oxide of iron with
animal or vegetable fat or oil, called keyip in Aka-J̌eru and ko̱iob in
Aka-Bea.

The common clay (odu) is used in three different ways. After the death
of a relative a man or woman smears himself all over with this clay and
plasters it on his head. From this custom a person who is mourning for
a dead relative is called aka-odu in Aka-J̌eru or aka-og in Aka-Bea. The
same clay is used at a certain stage of the initiation ceremonies, as
described above, being spattered over the initiate in the turtle-eating
and pig-eating ceremonies. The third and most common use of this clay
is to decorate the bodies of men and women with patterns called (in
Aka-J̌eru) e̱ra-puli. These patterns are always made by the women, who
decorate each other and their male relatives. The clay is mixed with
water in a wooden dish or a shell and the mixture is applied to the
body with the fingers. There is an almost indefinite variety in the
patterns employed, although there are a certain number of what may be
called usual designs. Each woman vies with others in her endeavours to
produce some novelty of detail in her designs, and a successful
innovation is immediately copied by others. I was able to watch the
rise and development and ultimate disappearance of “fashions” in this
connection in one of the camps of the North Andaman.

The design is made in one of two ways. It may, in some cases, be formed
by painting with the finger on the body, that is by tracing white (or
gray) lines on a black surface. A design of this kind is shown on the
back of the man on the right in the photograph of Plate XI. On the
other hand, an equally common method is to cover a part of the body
with an even smear of clay and then to scrape it away either with the
fingers or with a small fish-bone or with a little instrument made of
small strips of bamboo, so as to leave a design of black lines where
the skin shows through the smeared clay. Two not very striking designs
of this kind are shown in Plates IX and X. As a rule the designs are
more or less symmetrical, the right and the left sides of the body
being treated alike, but in a few cases different patterns are made on
the two sides, and I have seen a man with one side of his body painted
and the other not. The painting may cover the whole of the body and
limbs with the exception of the hands and feet, or it may be confined
to the front and back of the trunk, or it may be on the front only. The
face is often painted, the designs being made with greater care than
those on the body.

These patterns are made in the afternoon after the men return from
their day’s hunting, and always either just before or just after a
meal.

If a man be asked what pattern he is painted with, he replies by
mentioning the food that he has just eaten. A man who has been eating
turtle will say that the painting on his body is čokbi-t’e̱ra-puli,
turtle pattern, while if he has been eating pork he will call it
ra-t’e̱ra-puli, pig pattern. There is not, however, a strict uniformity
in the use of particular patterns in connection with special foods.
When the whole camp has been feasting on turtle many different and
(apparently) unrelated designs are to be seen on the bodies of the men
and women. I did not find it possible, even after a study of the
matter, to distinguish by means of the design a man who has been eating
turtle from one who has been eating pork. There is one design, or group
of closely related designs, that seemed to be based on the pattern of
the plates on a turtle’s carapace. A pattern of this distinctive kind
was never, so far as my experience went, used except after eating
turtle. Other patterns, however, which were used after eating turtle,
did not seem to me to be related in any way to what I may call the
specific turtle pattern. In some of the patterns used after eating pork
I noticed a tendency to make use of vertical lines or bands on the back
and chest. There may be a connection here with the longitudinal
markings on the back of the wild pig.

Of special patterns I was only able to discover two. One of these is
called kimil-t’e̱ra-puli and is only used to paint a person who is
aka-kimil, i.e., who has just been through one of the initiation
ceremonies. This pattern is shown on the back of a man in the
photograph reproduced as Plate XI (the second figure from the left).
Another special pattern is called toto-t’e̱ra-puli (Pandanus pattern),
and is used, I believe, to decorate a girl after the ceremony at her
first menstruation.

The fine white clay called to̱l-odu in Aka-J̌eru is used in a different
way and on different occasions. When it is used to ornament the body it
is always applied in one customary pattern. The name of this pattern in
Aka-J̌eru is o̱r-čubi-t’e̱ra-bat, from the name of a species of snake,
o̱r-čubi. Exactly the same name is used in A-Pučikwar,
wara-čupi-l’ar-par. Mr Man gives the Aka-Bea name as ǰobo-tartaŋa, from
ǰobo the name for snake in general. A man decorated with this “snake
pattern,” as it may be called, is shown in Plate XII, and a pattern of
the same kind is shown on the head of the man in Plate XIII. The
pattern is built up of zig-zag lines. They are made by taking a little
of the clay mixed with water between the thumb and first finger; by a
movement of the thumb the space between the nail and the skin of the
finger is filled with the clay, and the end of the finger is then
applied to the skin so that it leaves a short and fine line of clay. A
zig-zag line is thus built up of short lines each a finger’s breadth in
length. A second line is then added, not parallel to the first, but
opposed to it, so that the two lines together form a row of lozenges. A
third and sometimes a fourth or fifth line are similarly added. As
shown in Plate XII the lines of pattern are carried down the front of
the body, down the sides of the arms, and down the front of the legs,
and they are similarly worked on the back of the body, and the back of
the legs. The face also is decorated. These patterns are made by the
women. It is one of the duties of a wife to decorate her husband in
this way when occasion requires.

The only reason that the natives give for ornamenting themselves in
this way is that it makes them “look well.” On the occasion of a big
dance many of the performers are thus ornamented. This is always so at
the dances held when two or more local groups meet together. There are
certain special occasions, already mentioned in this chapter, when the
use of the “snake pattern” is required by custom. One of these is the
dance at the end of mourning. During the period of mourning the
mourners are forbidden to make use of this form of decoration. The same
pattern is used to decorate a bride and bridegroom after their
marriage. In the initiation ceremonies the youth or girl is decorated
in this way before the dances at the turtle-eating and pig-eating
ceremonies. The same pattern is also made on a corpse before burial.

In all these cases the whole body is decorated. On less ceremonial
occasions, such as an ordinary dance when there are no visitors of
importance in the camp, a man frequently has his face alone decorated
with white clay, as in the photograph of Plate XIII.

The third kind of material used for painting the body is red paint.
This is applied in two different ways. When a man or woman is ill he or
she is generally to be seen with some part of his body smeared with red
paint. For colds and coughs the chest and neck are painted. In fevers
red paint is smeared on the upper lip. Besides the medical use of red
paint, if we may call it so, there is a ceremonial use, the pigment
being used in combination with white clay, lines of red paint being
applied to the body between the lines of clay of the snake pattern. It
is used in this way to decorate the body of a dead person for burial,
and on ceremonial occasions such as the dance at the end of mourning
and the dances in connection with the initiation ceremonies.

Most of the ornaments worn at various times by the Andaman Islanders
have a ceremonial or a magical purpose. The only things worn by men
that can be considered to have a utilitarian value are the belt of rope
and the necklet of string. The belt may be a plain piece of rope, or it
may be ornamented with the yellow skin of a species of Dendrobium. It
serves as a receptacle in which the natives carry such things as adzes,
fish, roots, or even arrows. It is the one object that is constantly
worn by men. The string necklet is simply a length of thin string tied
round the neck. It serves as a means of carrying a knife and skewer.
The knife, in former days made of a slip of cane, but in these times
from a piece of scrap iron, is attached to a skewer of Areca wood by a
short length of rope or stout string. By sliding either the knife or
the skewer under the necklet at the back of the neck the double
implement hangs securely in a position where it is not likely to get
lost when running through the jungle, and where it is immediately
accessible when wanted. The necklet also serves as a means of carrying
bees’-wax, which is in constant use amongst the natives, a small ball
of the wax being attached to one of the ends of the string of which the
necklet is made.

As a rule, in everyday life, the men wear only a belt, or a belt and
necklace. Those natives who visit the Settlement of Port Blair have
been required by the European officers to wear a strip of cloth over
the genitals. It has now become the rule to wear such a loin cloth
whenever they are in the neighbourhood of a European. This, however, is
a modern custom, and in former times the men went freely with no
covering whatever, as do the inhabitants of the Little Andaman at the
present time. As showing the extent to which the natives have been
influenced in this matter by outside opinion, it may be mentioned that
at the present day many of the younger men, particularly those who have
been brought up at Port Blair, regard it as very immodest to be seen
without some covering over the genitals.

On ceremonial occasions, such as the dance at the end of mourning, or a
big dance-meeting, the men put on a number of ornaments. A common
costume on such occasions consists of a belt, necklace, bracelets, and
garters of netting and Dentalium shell. A belt and necklace of this
kind are to be seen in Plate V, and garters are worn by the woman in
Plate IX. An alternative costume for men consists of a set of ornaments
of Pandanus leaf (belt, chaplet, bracelets and garters), decorated with
Dentalium and other shells. Garters of this kind are shown in Plate
XII.

Other objects are worn by the natives for magical purposes. Chief
amongst these are the strings made of human bones which are worn to
prevent and cure sickness. The bones are attached to a length of rope,
and this is generally decorated with shells or with Dendrobium skin.
These strings of bones are worn most commonly as chaplets, necklaces or
belts, but they may also be made into garters and bracelets. The bones
of animals, such as pig, turtle, dugong, etc., are treated in exactly
the same way as human bones, and ornaments made of them are commonly
worn.

There are a number of other ornaments that are commonly worn, not only
on ceremonial occasions, which, unlike the strings of human bones, do
not obviously have a magical purpose. Such are necklaces made of
various kinds of shells, and of mangrove seeds. At the present time the
natives obtain beads from Port Blair and make ornaments of these.

The ordinary costume of the women is different from that of the men.
Every woman and girl wears at least one belt of Pandanus leaf. There is
one kind of belt that is always worn by married women and which may not
be worn by unmarried girls. There is another kind of belt that may only
be worn by unmarried girls. The women of the Southern tribes wear a
bundle of leaves of the Mimusops littoralis laid one over another
suspended from the front of the belt so as to cover the pudenda. In the
Northern tribes it was formerly the custom for the women to wear a
similar apron of the leaves of a plant called čainyo, and over this
they also wore a tassel of shredded palm-leaf stem (koro). Within
recent years the Northern tribes have given up their own custom in this
matter and have adopted the custom of the Southern tribes.

Women often wear round the neck a piece of string similar to that worn
by the men, but as they do not carry knives it does not serve the same
purpose. It is more usual for a woman to wear a necklace of some sort.
Nowadays they are rather fond of necklaces of beads which they obtain
from the Settlement at Port Blair. In former times different kinds of
shells were used, such as the Dentalium octogonum.

With the exception that men wear the belt of rope, and women wear the
belt of Pandanus leaf and the apron of leaves, there is no difference
between the ornaments worn by men and by women. On the occasion of a
dance or other ceremony a woman may wear any of the objects described
as being worn by men on such occasions. They also wear in the same way
strings of human or animal bones.

One object which would seem to have a purely utilitarian purpose is the
sling used for carrying children (called in Aka-J̌eru čiba). This
object, however, seems to have its ceremonial uses also. In one of the
initiation ceremonies that I saw, the man who was officiating wore such
a sling round his shoulders during the ceremony.

In the earlier parts of this chapter reference has been made several
times to the dance of the Andaman Islanders. For the natives the dance
is both a means of enjoyment and also a ceremony. The period of
mourning for the dead is brought to a close by a dance, in which all
the mourners join. As will be shown later, a dance was generally held
before a fight, in former times when fights occurred. The ceremony by
which two hostile local groups made peace with one another was a dance.

In the initiation ceremonies there are special dances, which have
already been described, in connection with the pig-eating and
turtle-eating ceremonies. With the exception of these special dances,
and the peace-making dance to be described later, there is only one
kind of dance in any given tribe. Thus the dance at the end of
mourning, or before setting out on an attack on enemies, is in all
essentials exactly the same as the dance in which the natives indulge
when the day’s hunting has been successful and the evening is fine.

The time for dancing, except in connection with certain ceremonies, is
at night, after the evening meal. The dance takes place on the open
ground in the centre of the village. This is swept clean by the women
and the younger men. One or two fires are lighted, and little heaps of
resin are placed in convenient situations to provide lights. These have
to be replenished from time to time as the dance proceeds. Near one end
of the dancing ground is placed a sounding-board, upon which it is the
duty of one man to beat time with his foot. A sounding-board is a piece
of wood somewhat of the shape of a large shield, cut from the hard
Pterocarpus tree. One is shown in Plate VI. Behind the sounding-board,
or a little to one side of it, the women, who form the chorus, sit in a
row, with their legs stretched out in front of them, facing the
dancing-ground. The men who intend to dance sit or stand round the edge
of the space reserved for the dance.

When all is ready a man who has volunteered to sing the first song
takes his stand at the sounding-board, and sings his song through. When
he reaches the chorus the women take it up and repeat it after him, and
as they do so each woman marks time by clapping her hands on the hollow
formed by her thighs, the legs being crossed one over the other at the
ankle. The singer continues to sing, thus leading the chorus, and at
the same time marks the time of the song by beating on the
sounding-board with his foot. As soon as the chorus begins the dancers
begin to dance. The step of each dancer is the same, but there is very
little attempt to form a figure. When the singer and the chorus get
tired, the singing ceases, but the man at the sounding-board continues
to mark time for the dancers. The singer repeats his song several
times, and he may sing several songs, each repeated several times. When
he gets tired he is relieved by another man. In a dance that lasts for
any time, one singer succeeds another, and the singing and dancing are
kept up continuously, sometimes for five or six hours.

The above description applies to all the tribes of the Great Andaman,
but there are some differences between the four tribes of the North
Andaman, and the tribes of the Middle and South Andaman.

In the North Andaman the song is sung through once from beginning to
end by the singer, and is then repeated three or four times by the
chorus. In the South Andaman each song consists of one verse and a
refrain, if we may speak of them thus. The singer sings the verse and
the refrain, and then the refrain only is repeated an indefinite number
of times by the chorus.

In the dance of the Southern tribes, each dancer dances alternately on
the right foot or on the left. When dancing on the right foot the first
movement is a slight hop with the right foot, then the left foot is
raised and brought down with a backward scrape along the ground, then
another hop on the right foot. These three movements, which occupy the
time of two beats of the song, are repeated until the right leg is
tired, and the dancer then changes the movement to a hop with the left
foot, followed by a scrape with the right and another hop with the
left. The time of the movement is as follows, the upper line being the
rhythm of the dance, while the lower line shows the beats of the song,
which is marked on the sounding-board and by the clapping of the women.

    [Music Notes] or [Music Notes]

The body of the dancer is bent slightly forward from the hips, the legs
being flexed at the knees and the back being curved well inwards. There
are several ways of holding the hands and arms, one of the commonest
being to hold the arms outstretched in front on a level with the
shoulders, while the thumb and forefinger of one hand are interlocked
with those of the other. When a man does not wish to cease altogether
from dancing but desires to have a short rest, he marks the time by
raising each heel alternately from the ground. As a man dances he
remains in one spot for a short time, and then, still continuing the
same step, moves for a yard or two around the circle of the dancing
ground. Every now and then a dancer is to be seen trotting from one
position to another across the dancing ground, abandoning the step of
the dance, but still keeping time to the song.

The Northern tribes have now adopted the same kind of dance as the
tribes of the South, but formerly their dance was slightly different.
There was a little more attempt at forming a figure, the dancers moving
for the most part in a circle, some in one direction and others in the
other. The step was as follows: a step forward with the right foot, a
hop on the right foot, a scrape with the left, then another hop with
the right, a step forward with the left foot, a hop with the left, a
scrape with the right and a hop with the left. The rhythm is as
follows:—

    [Music Notes]

The lower line shows the beats on the sounding-board.

Some of the dancers occasionally break into the regular Southern step.
A dancer sometimes changes from the usual step to another called ko̱i,
in which each foot is alternately struck on the ground and scraped
backwards. Other slight variations of the movement may be introduced.

In both the Southern and the Northern dance each dancer pleases himself
as to the direction in which he moves, and the step that he adopts at
any given moment. All the dancers, however independently of one another
they dance, keep strict time to the music.

Women do not, as a rule, join in the ordinary dances held in the
evening. Their share in the entertainment consists of forming the
chorus. When they do dance, as they do on certain occasions, such as
the dance at the end of mourning, their step is different from that of
the men. In the Southern tribes the female dancer stands at one spot
with knees flexed and lifts her heels alternately from the ground in
time to the music, thus producing a slight swaying or swinging motion
of the hips. After dancing thus at one spot for a few moments, she
moves forward a few steps to a new position, keeping time to the music
in all her movements, and then repeats the same performance. The arms
are swung in time to the dance, or else are held before the breast with
one wrist crossed over the other.

In the Northern tribes the common dance of the women is a sort of
modification of that of the men. A woman advances across the ground in
regular time, but at every third step she gives a peculiar little hop
which has something of the effect of a bobbing curtsey. The time is as
follows:—

    [Music Notes]

l and r standing for left and right foot, and the accent indicating the
hop or curtsey. Every now and then a dancer stops and remains at one
spot, alternately scraping each foot backwards, holding her knees
flexed, and swinging both arms together.

The ordinary dance of the Andamanese, as described above, must always
be accompanied by a song, and the purpose of every song is to serve as
the accompaniment to a dance. Every man composes his own songs. No one
would ever sing (at a dance) a song composed by any other person. There
are no traditional songs. Women occasionally compose songs, but I never
heard a woman sing at a dance except in the chorus.

Every man composes songs, and the boys begin to practise themselves in
the art of composition when they are still young. A man composes his
song as he cuts a canoe or a bow or as he paddles a canoe, singing it
over softly to himself, until he is satisfied with it. He then awaits
an opportunity to sing it in public, and for this he has to wait for a
dance. Before the dance he takes care to teach the chorus to one or two
of his female relatives so that they can lead the chorus of women. He
sings his song, and if it is successful he repeats it several times,
and thereafter it becomes part of his repertory, for every man of any
age has a repertory of songs that he is prepared to repeat at any time.
If the song is not successful, if the chorus and dancers do not like
it, the composer abandons it and does not repeat it. Some men are
recognized as being more skilful song-makers than others.

The songs all deal with everyday subjects such as hunting or cutting a
canoe. The important thing about a song is not its sense, but its
sound, i.e., its rhythm and melody. A translation of an Akar-Bale song,
which is quite typical, is “Po̱io, the son of Mam Golat, wants to know
when I am going to finish my canoe. He comes every day. That is why I
make haste to get it launched as soon as possible.” Another on the same
subject runs: “Knots are very hard to cut with an adze. They blunt the
edge of the adze. How hard I am working cutting these knots.” The
singer here refers to the cutting of a canoe. A number of songs in the
native languages with translations, are given by Mr Portman [68]. To
these the reader may refer for further information.

According to the statements of the natives it was formerly the custom
to have a dance before setting out to a fight. There was no special
war-dance, the warriors joining in an ordinary dance such as has just
been described. Those who intended to take part in the attack on their
enemies, i.e., all the able-bodied adult males, decorated themselves
with red paint and white clay, and put on ornaments of Pandanus leaf or
netting and shells. Each man held in his hands or placed in his belt or
head-dress plumes of shredded Tetranthera wood (called čelmo in
Aka-J̌eru, uǰ in Aka-Bea). These plumes of shredded wood are now often
worn or carried in an ordinary dance, but I believe that in former
times they were the distinctive sign of a war-dance. To make them, a
short length of the wood is taken (generally a piece of an old broken
pig-arrow) and the wood is carefully shredded with a Cyrena shell, care
being taken not to break any of the longitudinal fibres. One end is
then tied with a piece of string or fibre. Similar plumes are made from
Pandanus wood, and are carried or worn in a similar manner.

When the attacking party set out from their village each man wears a
plume of shredded Tetranthera wood thrust into the back of his belt.
They rub their bows with the shredded wood, and say that this has the
effect of making their own bows shoot well and those of their enemies
shoot badly.

If a man kills another in a fight between two villages, or in a private
quarrel, he leaves his village and goes to live by himself in the
jungle, where he must stay for some weeks, or even months. His wife,
and one or two of his friends may live with him or visit him and attend
to his wants. For some weeks the homicide must observe a rigorous tabu.
He must not handle a bow or arrow. He must not feed himself or touch
any food with his hands, but must be fed by his wife or a friend. He
must keep his neck and upper lip covered with red paint, and must wear
plumes of shredded Tetranthera wood (čelmo) in his belt before and
behind, and in his necklace at the back of his neck. If he breaks any
of these rules it is supposed that the spirit of the man he has killed
will cause him to be ill. At the end of a few weeks the homicide
undergoes a sort of purification ceremony. His hands are first rubbed
with white clay (to̱l-odu) and then with red paint. After this he may
wash his hands and may then feed himself with his hands and may handle
bows and arrows. He retains the plumes of shredded wood for a year or
so.

In the North Andaman, and possibly in the South also, there was a
ceremony by which two hostile local groups made peace with one another.
When the two groups have agreed to make friends and bring their quarrel
to an end, arrangements are made for this ceremony. The arrangements
are made through the women of the two parties. A day is fixed for the
ceremony, which takes place in the country of the group that made the
last attack. In the village of this group the dancing ground is
prepared, and across it is erected what is called a koro-čop. Posts are
put up in a line, to the tops of these is attached a length of strong
cane, and from the cane are suspended bundles of shredded palm-leaf
(koro). The appearance of this construction may be seen from the
photograph reproduced in Plate XIX. The women of the camp keep a
look-out for the approach of the visitors. When they are known to be
near the camp, the women sit down on one side of the dancing ground,
and the men take up positions in front of the decorated cane. Each man
stands with his back against the koro-čop, with his arms stretched out
sideways along the top of it. None of them has any weapons.

The visitors, who are, if we may so put it, the forgiving party, while
the home party are those who have committed the last act of hostility,
advance into the camp dancing, the step being that of the ordinary
dance. The women of the home party mark the time of the dance by
clapping their hands on their thighs. I was told that the visitors
carry their weapons with them, but when the dance was performed at my
request the dancers were without weapons. The visitors dance forward in
front of the men standing at the koro-čop, and then, still dancing all
the time, pass backwards and forwards between the standing men, bending
their heads as they pass beneath the suspended cane. The dancers make
threatening gestures at the men standing at the koro-čop, and every now
and then break into a shrill shout. The men at the koro stand silent
and motionless and are expected to show no sign of fear.

After they have been dancing thus for a little time, the leader of the
dancers approaches the man at one end of the koro and, taking him by
the shoulders from the front, leaps vigorously up and down to the time
of the dance, thus giving the man he holds a good shaking. The leader
then passes on to the next man in the row while another of the dancers
goes through the same performance with the first man. This is continued
until each of the dancers has “shaken” each of the standing men. The
dancers then pass under the koro and shake their enemies in the same
manner from the back. After a little more dancing the dancers retire,
and the women of the visiting group come forward and dance in much the
same way that the men have done, each woman giving each of the men of
the other group a good shaking.

When the women have been through their dance the two parties of men and
women sit down and weep together.

The two groups remain camped together for a few days, spending the time
in hunting and dancing together. Presents are exchanged, as at the
ordinary meetings of different groups. The men of the two groups
exchange bows with one another.








CHAPTER III

RELIGIOUS AND MAGICAL BELIEFS


The Andaman Islanders believe in the existence of a class of
supernatural beings which I propose to denote by the term “spirits.”
The native name for these spirits is lau, lao or yau in the languages
of the North and Middle Andaman, and čauga in the South Andaman. While
all spirits are denoted together by the term lau or čauga, there are
certain special classes of spirits. There are, for instance, spirits
that haunt the jungles of the islands. These are called in the North
Andaman Ti-miku Lau, from the word ti-miku meaning the forest, or more
accurately “land.” (The only land known to the Andamanese is covered
with forest.) In Aka-Bea the name for these jungle spirits is E̱rem
Čauga, the word e̱rem being the equivalent in that language of the
Northern ti-miku. In the North Andaman the Ti-miku Lau are often called
Bido Teč Lau, i.e., spirits of the Calamus leaf, bido being the name of
the Calamus tigrinus. This cane is armed with strong thorns, and in
some parts of the jungle forms absolutely impenetrable thickets. The
natives say that the spirits haunt these thickets, and hence their
name.

There are other spirits that live in the sea. Although these may be
included under the term Lau or Čauga, when it is used in a general
sense, yet there is a special name for the sea spirits, J̌urua in the
North Andaman, and J̌uruwin in Aka-Bea. The J̌urua are beings of the same
nature as the Ti-miku Lau, with the difference that they live in the
sea, while the latter live in the forest.

In the South Andaman the natives also speak of another class of spirits
who live in the sky and are called Mo̱rua or Mo̱rowin.


When an Andamanese man or woman dies he or she becomes a spirit, i.e.,
a Lau or Čauga. The bones of a dead person, which are dug up after the
flesh has decayed, are called Lau to̱i in the North Andaman, to̱i being
the word for “bone.” The skull is Lau t’e̱r-čo, from the word e̱r-čo
meaning “head.” Exactly similar terms are in use in Aka-Bea, the bones
of a dead man being called Čauga ta (spirit bones).

The Andamanese relate legends, to be described in the next chapter,
which concern the doings of mythical ancestors. As all Andamanese, when
they die, become Lau, these ancestors are of course included under that
term. They are often distinguished from the spirits of persons recently
dead by being denoted as Lau t’e̱r-kuro, from the word e̱r-kuro meaning
“big,” and applied to human beings to denote importance of social
position. Just as a man who occupies a prominent position in his tribe
is called a “big” man (e̱r-kuro), so the ancestors of the Andamanese
legends are called “big” spirits. The Aka-Bea use a similar term, Čauga
tabaŋa, to distinguish the ancestors from the spirits of ordinary
persons.

The name Lau or Čauga is also applied by the Andamanese to the natives
of India and Burma whom they see in the Penal Settlement of Port Blair.
The Aka-J̌eru name for the Penal Settlement is Lau-t’ara-nyu, literally
“the village of the spirits.” At the present time the term Lau or Čauga
is not applied to Europeans, who are generally spoken of in the North
Andaman by the Hindustani word “sahib.” Natives of the North Andaman
told me that in former times (before 1875) they applied the term Lau to
Europeans also not distinguishing them from other light-skinned aliens.
The necessity for distinguishing between Asiatics, such as natives of
India, and Europeans, has only arisen since they have come to have
dealings with the Penal Settlement.

The term Lau is not applied by the Andamanese to aliens of their own
race. Nor would it be applied, I believe, to men of other black races
such as the African negro. I showed the natives photographs of Semang
from the Malay Peninsula and also of natives of Africa and New Guinea,
and in all cases they called them J̌a̤rawa, that being the term applied
by the Great Andaman tribes to the natives of the Little Andaman. On
the other hand they called Polynesians Lau.

For many centuries the Andaman Islanders have been accustomed to see
light-skinned men visit their shores in ships, Europeans, natives from
the coasts of India, Burma and Malaya, and occasionally perhaps
Chinese. To these aliens they gave the name of Lau, apparently
regarding them as visitors from the only other world they knew of, the
world of spirits [69]. The clothes that these “spirits” wore they
called Lau ot-ǰulu, the word ot-ǰulu meaning “cold.”

The spirits of the forest and the sea are believed to be generally
invisible, but there are tales of men and women who have seen them, and
their personal appearance is sometimes described. The descriptions vary
considerably from one informant to another. One of the commonest
statements is that they are light or white skinned. (The Andamanese
vocabulary does not allow of any distinction between white and a light
gray or a light shade of colour.) One man, however, said that the
forest spirits are black (or dark), while the sea spirits are white (or
light). I was told several times that the spirits have long hair and
beards (the Andamanese having, as a rule, no beard, and their hair,
being frizzy, never growing to any length). Their arms and legs are
said to be abnormally long, while they have only small bodies. Though
there is no uniformity in the way in which the natives describe the
spirits of the jungle and the sea, there is a notable tendency to
associate them with the grotesque, the ugly, and the fearful. There is
a common belief that the spirits, both of the jungle and of the sea,
carry about with them lights, which several men and women claim to have
seen.

In reply to the question as to how the spirits of the forest and the
sea originated, the natives all agree in saying that they are the
spirits of dead men and women.

The jungle spirits live in a village (or villages) in the forest. There
is a belief that mortals wandering by themselves in the jungle have
been captured by the spirits. Should the captive show any fear, my
informants said, the spirits would kill him, but if he were brave they
would take him to their village, detaining him for a time, and then
releasing him to return to his friends. A man to whom such an adventure
has happened will be endowed for the rest of his life with power to
perform magic. He will pay occasional visits to his friends the
spirits. The natives told me of one such man who died not many years
ago. At irregular intervals he used to wander off into the jungle by
himself and remain absent for a few hours, sometimes for a day or two.
He returned to the village after such an absence looking strange and
wearing ornaments of shredded palm-leaf (koro) which he claimed had
been placed upon him by the spirits.

Save for persons who have made friends with them, and have thereby
become endowed with magical powers, all contact with the spirits of the
jungle and the sea, or with the spirit of a dead man, is dangerous. The
spirits are believed to be the cause of all sickness and of all deaths
resulting from sickness. As a man wanders in the jungle or by the sea,
the spirits come invisibly and strike him, whereupon he falls ill, and
may die. A man or woman is more likely to be attacked by the spirits if
he or she is alone, and it is therefore always better to be in company
when away from the village. The spirits rarely venture into the village
itself, though they may prowl round it, particularly at night. They are
more dangerous at night than during the day.

There are many objects that are believed to have the power of keeping
spirits at a distance, and thus of preserving human beings from the
danger of sickness. Amongst the most important of these are fire,
arrows, human bones, bees’-wax, and red paint. A man or a woman leaving
a hut to go only a few yards at night will always carry a fire-brand as
a protection against spirits that may be prowling in the neighbourhood.
If the night be dark a torch is carried in addition to the fire-stick.

The Andamanese will never whistle at night, as they believe that the
noise of whistling would attract spirits. On the other hand they
believe that singing will keep the spirits away.

The spirits that haunt the woods and waters of a man’s own home are
regarded as being less dangerous to him than those of a country in
which he is a stranger. A man of the Aka-Čari tribe who was with me in
Rutland Island had a cold on his chest. He asked me for permission to
return to his own country, explaining that the spirits of Rutland
Island were, so to speak, at enmity with him, and that if he stayed
longer he would be seriously ill, and perhaps die, while on the other
hand, the spirits of his own country were friendly towards him, and
once he was amongst them he would quickly recover.

There is a belief that the spirits feed on the flesh of dead men and
women. The jungle spirits eat those who are buried on land, and the
J̌urua devour those who are drowned or otherwise lost in the sea.

Mr Man’s account of the spirits of the jungle and sea contains an
important error, which needs to be pointed out. He writes as though
there were only one E̱rem Čauga (jungle spirit) and only one J̌uruwin
(sea spirit), whereas each of these names is the name not of a single
individual but of a class of supernatural beings of which there is an
indefinite number. The following is Mr Man’s account:—E̱rem-čauga-la,
the “evil spirit of the woods, has a numerous progeny by his wife Čana
Badgi-lola, who remains at home with her daughters and younger
children, while her husband and grown up sons roam about the jungles
with a lighted torch attached to their left legs, in order that the
former may injure any unhappy wights who may meet them unprotected, and
in the dark; he generally makes his victims ill, or kills them by
wounding them internally with invisible arrows, and if he is successful
in causing death, it is supposed that they feast upon the raw flesh.”
“As regards J̌uruwin, the evil spirit of the sea, they say that he too
is invisible, and lives in the sea with his wife and children, who help
him to devour the bodies of those who are drowned or buried at sea;
fish constitute the staple of his food, but he also occasionally, by
way of variety, attacks the aborigines he finds fishing on the shores
or by the creeks. The weapon he uses is a spear, and persons who are
seized with cramp or any sudden illness, on returning from, or while on
the water are said to have been ‘speared’ by J̌uruwin. He has various
submarine residences, and boats for travelling under the surface of the
sea, while he carries with him a net, in which he places all the
victims, human or piscine, he may succeed in capturing [70].”

Mr Portman correctly translates the word J̌uruwin as meaning “the
spirits of the sea” using the plural and not the singular [71].

Further references to the Andamanese beliefs about the spirits will be
found later in the chapter. It is necessary at this point to consider
an entirely different class of beings.

The Andaman Islanders personify the phenomena of nature with which they
are acquainted, such as the sun and the moon. Before relating in detail
what could be learnt about their beliefs on these matters, it is
necessary to call attention to one feature of these beliefs. Different
statements, not only of different informants, but even of the same
informant, are often quite contradictory. For example, it is sometimes
said that lightning is a person, and at other times it is said that
lightning is a fire-brand thrown across the sky by a mythical being
named Biliku. These two statements, which to all logical thinking are
incompatible, are both given, and apparently both equally believed, by
the same person. Many examples of such contradictions will be found in
what follows, and it is important to point out their existence
beforehand.

About the sun and moon, the most usual statement in all the tribes is
that the sun is the wife of the moon and the stars are their children.
In the North Andaman the moon is Maia Dula (Aka-Čari) or Maia Čirikli
(Aka-J̌eru), the sun is Mimi Diu and their children the stars are Čatlo,
the larger ones, and Katań the smaller. Čatlo is the name of a species
of finely marked beetle, and katań is the name of the common fire-fly.
Individual stars or constellations are not recognized.

Another version from the same tribes is that the moon (Dula) is female,
and has a husband named Maia Tok, while the sun (Diu or To̱rodiu) is
male.

In the Aka-J̌eru tribe there is a belief that the moon (Maia Čirikli)
can, when he wishes, turn himself into a pig, and come down to earth
and feed on the things that the pigs eat. There is a legend that on one
occasion the moon thus turned himself into a pig and came down to earth
to eat the čuei fruit. A man named Maia Čoinyop met the moon (in the
form of a pig) in the forest, and shot him with an arrow. Čirikli (the
moon) took out his knife and killed the unfortunate Čoinyop, cutting
off his head, which he left behind, and taking the body up to the sky
where he ate it.

In the A-Pučikwar tribe the most common statement is that the moon
(Puki) is male and that the sun (Puto) is his wife. A different
statement from the same tribe is that the moon is female and is the
wife of a being named Tomo. Tomo seems to be to some extent identified
with the sun. Thus one informant said that it is Tomo who sends the
fine weather, and that it is he who sends the daylight every day. Where
Tomo lives, in the sky, it is always day and is always fine. When the
natives die their spirits go up to the sky and live with Tomo. We shall
see in the next chapter that, according to some of the legends, Tomo is
the first ancestor of the Andamanese.

Yet another version is that the moon was made by Tomo out of opalescent
stone, and it is Tomo who, in some way, regulates its passage across
the sky.

A belief about the moon which is found in all the tribes, both of the
North and the South, is that he will be very angry if there is any
fire, or any bright light, visible when he rises in the evening shortly
after sundown. At such times the natives are careful to cover up their
fires so that they only smoulder without flame. Mr Man refers to this
custom. “From fear of displeasing Maia Ogar (Mr Moon), during the first
few evenings of the third quarter, when he rises after sundown, they
preserve silence, cease from any work on which they may be engaged—even
halting should they be travelling—and almost extinguishing any light or
fire that may be burning. This is owing to the belief that he is
jealous of attention being distracted to other objects than himself at
such a time, or of any other light being employed than that which he
had been graciously pleased to afford so abundantly. By the time the
moon has ascended a few degrees, however, they restore their fires and
resume their former occupations, as they consider that they have
sufficiently complied with Maia Ogar’s wishes and requirements. The
glowing aspect of the full moon on its first appearance above the
horizon is supposed to indicate that Maia Ogar is enraged at finding
some persons neglecting to observe these conciliatory measures; there
is also an idea that, if he be greatly annoyed, he will punish them by
withdrawing or diminishing the light of his countenance [72].”

As regards the waxing and waning of the moon, Mr Man says that these
are explained by the Aka-Bea “by saying that they are occasioned by
‘his’ applying a coating of cloud to his person by degrees, after the
manner of their own use of ko̱iob (red paint) and tala-o̱g (white clay)
and then gradually wiping it off [73].” In the Aka-Kede tribe the
natives say that as Maia Čirike (Sir Moon) goes across the sky, his
tongue hangs out of his mouth, sometimes more, sometimes less, and that
it is the tongue that is visible, that gives the light. I did not hear
any explanation of the waxing and waning of the moon in the tribes of
the North Andaman. In these tribes the new moon is called Dula e-tire,
i.e. the “baby moon,” the word e-tire denoting the young offspring of
an animal or a human being.

With regard to a lunar eclipse Mr Man writes that “in case Maia Ogar
should be so ill-advised as permanently to withhold his light or render
himself in other ways still more disagreeable, whenever the moon is
eclipsed some persons at once seize their bows and twang them as
rapidly as possible, thereby producing a rattling sound as if
discharging a large number of arrows, while others commence at once
sharpening their rata (arrows). Of course this hostile demonstration is
never lost upon the moon, who does not venture to hurt those who show
themselves ready to give him so uncomfortable a reception. Their
immunity from harm on these occasions has given rise to some joking at
the expense of the luminary in question, for, during the continuance of
the eclipse, they shout in inviting tones to the hidden orb as
follows:—Ogar, laden balak ban lebe ŋ’idoati! doati! doati! (O Moon, I
will give you the seed of the balak! show yourself! appear! appear!)
This is said derisively, for, although these seeds are largely consumed
by the pigs, the aborigines do not consider them fit for food [74].”

It may be noted that the invitation to the moon to eat balak seeds is
not perhaps derisive, but may be connected with the belief that the
moon can turn himself into a pig in order to feed on the things that
pigs eat.

There was no eclipse of the moon during my stay in the islands. The
natives of the North Andaman told me that on such an occasion they
frighten the moon into showing himself again by lighting the end of a
bamboo arrow-shaft, and shooting it from a bow in the direction of the
moon. Another custom of which they told me is to take plumes of
shredded Tetranthera wood (čelmo or uǰ) and blow on them towards the
moon.

Mr Man states that “a solar eclipse alarms them too much to allow of
their indulging in jests or threats, &c.: during the time it lasts they
all remain silent and motionless, as if in momentary expectation of
some calamity [75].”

There are several different accounts in the North Andaman of the
phenomena of day and night. The night is often personified and is
called Mimi Bat (Lady Night). One version is that it is she who makes
the night while Maia To̱rodiu makes the day. Diu is the name of the sun,
and to̱ro-diu really means “the full sun” and refers to the middle part
of the day when the sun is well up in the sky.

Another Northern version is that the daylight is made by a being named
Tauto̱bitatmo̱ who lives in the sky. He shuts up the day under a stone
every evening and lets it out every morning. Of Tauto̱bitatmo̱ I was told
that he is sometimes to be seen in the evening sky, but I was not able
to discover to what natural phenomenon reference was made. I was also
unable to discover the meaning of the name, which is a compound, tau
being the sky.

Still another version from the same tribes is that it is a being named
Maia Čara who makes the daylight. Čara seems to be the equivalent of
the Tomo of the A-Pučikwar and other Southern tribes. He is sometimes
said to have been the first ancestor, and sometimes the creator, of the
Andamanese. He lives in the sky.

Another belief about the night connects it with the spirits. The Lau
(spirits) in the sky, wrap up the night in a cloth or mat. When they
unroll the cloth it becomes dark. The natives of the North Andaman
formerly called cloth lau-ot-ǰulu, from a stem -ǰulu meaning “cold.”
They were only acquainted with cloth through seeing it used by the
aliens who visited their shores, and whom they called spirits (Lau).

In the North Andaman thunder and lightning are commonly personified.
The lightning is Ele or Ali, and the thunder is Korude or Korule. Some
of the natives spoke of Mimi Ele (female) and others of Maia Ele
(male). He lives in the sky, which is regarded as being made of stone
(or rock) and is called tau-meo (the sky-stone). The lightning is due
to his shaking his foot. One rather obscure statement was to the effect
that Ele spends most of his time asleep or lying down and doing
nothing. When the weather gets bad Lato (a being that I could not
identify), comes and worries Ele and wakes him up. Then Ele gets angry
and shakes his leg. This is the lightning.

Thunder (Korude) also lives in the sky. It is said that he makes the
thunder by means of a large round stone. One account is that he rolls
the stone about over the sky. Another is that he makes the stone hot,
and this produces the thunder.

An entirely different explanation of thunder and lightning, which is
found in all the tribes, is that they are made by two beings named
Tarai and Biliku, to be described later on in this chapter.

I never heard the rain (ǰiče̱r) spoken of as a person in the same way as
thunder and lightning. One explanation of rain is that the sky-stone
(tau-meo) gets cold, and this turns the mist (milite) into rain.
Another is that in the sky there is a large hollow or pool, which gets
filled with water and then overflows. Still another version is that the
rain is made by a being (or beings) named Čaitoŋ, who seems to be
female and lives in the sky. I could not obtain any satisfactory
information about her.

In all parts of the islands the rainbow is believed to have some
connection with the spirits of the jungle or of the sea. One very
common statement is that it is a bridge of cane that stretches between
this world and the world of departed spirits. It is along the rainbow
that the spirits travel when they visit the earth. It is necessary to
correct a statement by Mr Portman on this matter. In connection with
the Aka-Bea word for the rainbow, pidga-l’ar-čauga, he says “The root
pidga (a rainbow) must not be confounded with the root pidga ‘a cane’
or ‘rattan.’ The Andamanese have certain legends regarding the uses of
the rainbow, and these have been hitherto understood as referring to
‘canes.’ Pidga-l’ar-čauga means ‘the rainbow (bridge) by which the
spirits (cross)’ [76].” Mr Portman is in error. The word pidga means
“cane” and the whole word means “the cane of the spirits.” It is the
whole word that is the name of the rainbow, and not the word pidga. An
exactly similar compound name for the rainbow exists in each of the
languages of the Great Andaman. The name of the particular species of
large cane varies, being pidga in Aka-Bea, peta in A-Pučikwar, pir in
Aka-J̌eru, and so on. Apart from the fact that the natives themselves
say that the rainbow is a “cane,” Mr Portman would have us believe that
in each of the different languages there are two exactly similar words,
different in the different languages, one of which means “cane” and the
other “rainbow,” while there is no connection between the words. Thus
Aka-Bea would have pidga meaning “a kind of cane” and pidga meaning “a
rainbow.” Aka-J̌eru would have pir meaning “cane” and pir meaning
“rainbow.”

The rainbow is generally regarded as an evil omen, being believed to be
a precursor of sickness. One Aka-J̌eru statement is that it is made by a
being called To̱lito̱ŋ and that when it appears somebody will be ill.

The only explanation of the tides that I heard was to the effect that
they are caused by a fish, a species of Tetrodon, called čolmo in
Aka-J̌eru and pit in Aka-Kede, which drinks up the water and then lets
it out again.

The Andaman Islands are occasionally visited by earthquakes. An
Aka-Kede account of how earthquakes are caused is that when a man dies
he goes to the spirit world which is beneath the earth. The spirits
hold a ceremony. My informant spoke of the ceremony as Kimil, which is
the name of the initiation ceremonies. At this ceremony they have a
dance similar to the peace-making dance described in the last chapter,
but instead of erecting a screen such as is used in that ceremony, they
make use of the rainbow. As they shake the rainbow in dancing this
causes earthquakes. The ceremony which newly-arrived spirits have to
undergo in the world after death is a po̱ro̱to kimil, i.e., the initiate
eats po̱ro̱to (Caryota sobolifera).

Among the most important of the Andamanese beliefs are those relating
to the weather and the seasons. These are under the control of two
beings named Biliku, Bilik or Puluga, and Tarai, Teriya, or Daria.
There are a certain number of points in which the statements of one
informant may differ from those of another in connection with these two
mythical beings, but there are also a certain number of points on which
there is absolute unanimity in all the tribes of the Great Andaman.

The first belief in which there is entire unanimity is that of the
connection of Biliku and Tarai with the two chief winds that are known
in the Andamans. Biliku lives in the north-east and is connected with
the north-east monsoon. Tarai lives in the south-west and is connected
with the south-west monsoon. The connection is shown in the names of
these winds, which are as follows:—


    Language                               N.E. Wind     S.W. Wind

    Aka-Cari, Aka-Bo, Aka-Kora, Aka-Jeru   Biliku boto   Tarai boto
    Oko-Juwoi, Aka-Kol and A-Pucikwar      Bilik to      Teriya
    Akar-Bale                              Puluga toa    Daria
    Aka-Bea                                Puluga ta     Deria


In the Northern tribes the word bo̱to means “wind.” Biliku bo̱to must be
translated “the Biliku wind,” and Tarai bo̱to is similarly “the Tarai
wind.” It would be incorrect to translate the name Biliku bo̱to as “the
wind of Biliku,” for this would be rendered in Aka-J̌eru by Biliku ičo
bo̱to. In A-Pučikwar the south-west wind is called Teriya simply, the
name of the mythical being connected with the wind being used as the
name of the wind itself, just as is the case with the name Ele
(lightning). On the other hand the north-east wind is called not Bilik
but Bilik to̱. The same thing occurs also in the Akar-Bale and Aka-Bea
languages.

Mr Portman translates the Aka-Bea term Puluga ta as “God’s wind,” and
he adds, in explanation, “Puluga ta means ‘God’s wind,’ and the reason
for the name is not known. Some vague ideas regarding the direction of
God’s dwelling in the sky are the probable origin of the term [77].” As
regards the translation of the Andamanese name Puluga by the English
“God” more will be said later. Leaving that aside, it is important to
note that Puluga ta does not mean “Puluga’s wind.” The word for wind in
Aka-Bea is given by Mr Portman himself as wul-ŋa, and the Akar-Bale and
A-Pučikwar equivalents are poat-ŋa and po̱te, being forms of the same
stem as the Northern bo̱to. The translation of “Puluga’s wind” in
A-Pučikwar would be Bilik l’iye po̱te, but this is not a phrase that the
natives ever use. It is not possible to translate “Puluga’s wind”
accurately in Akar-Bale. Puluga poat-ŋa would mean “Puluga blowing” the
-ŋa being a verbal ending. In any case Bilik to̱, and Puluga toa are not
to be translated as meaning “Puluga’s wind.”

It may be observed, in reference to Mr Portman’s statement, that the
notions of the Andamanese as to the direction of the dwelling of Puluga
in the sky are very far from vague. The natives all agree that Puluga
or Biliku lives in the direction from which the north-east wind blows,
really N.N.E. This is shown in geographical names. For example the side
of Havelock Island that faces north-east is called Puluga-l’ar-mugu,
meaning “the side that faces Puluga,” from ar-mugu meaning “front” or
“face.”

There are two matters, then, on which there is absolute unanimity in
all the tribes of the Great Andaman, one being the connection of Biliku
(or Puluga) with the north-east and of Tarai (or Deria) with the
south-west, and the other being the connection of these two beings with
the winds that blow from these two opposite points of the compass.

The connection of these two beings with winds is shown in another way
in the A-Pučikwar tribe, where the winds are divided into two
divisions. One division contains only the south-west wind, which is of
extreme regularity, and blows steadily for about five months in every
year. This wind is called Teriya. The other division contains all the
other winds, and they are collectively denoted by the term Bilik. They
are distinguished by names, as J̌ila Bilik (the east Bilik, from ǰila,
east), Ko̱ico Bilik (the west Bilik), Me̱tepur Bilik, Čo̱liatum Bilik,
Rartear Bilik, and Ko̱ičor-to̱ŋ Bilik. Here we find the name Bilik used
not as the name of a single person, but as a common name for a class of
beings who are the winds personified. The same use of the term is found
also in the Aka-Ko̱l tribe.

Even in the Akar-Bale tribe something of the same kind is found. One
Akar-Bale man said that Puluga has two brothers, J̌ila Puluga (East
Puluga) and Koaičo Puluga (West Puluga); the one sends all the easterly
winds and the other all the westerly ones.

In the Andamans the year is divided into two nearly equal portions.
During the season of the south-west monsoon, which lasts from May to
September, the wind blows steadily from the south-west. This is the
rainy season. Violent storms never or only very rarely occur during the
season of the south-west wind. From December to March the wind blows
mostly from the N.N.E., occasionally changing to E.N.E. or N.E. In the
periods at the change of the monsoon (from N.E. to S.W. in April and
May, and from S.W. to N.E. in October and November) the wind is
variable, and may blow at times from E.S.E. or W.N.W.

The south-west wind (properly speaking W.S.W.) is identified, as we
have seen with Tarai (Deria). Although Biliku (Puluga) is specially
connected with the north-east wind, yet all the winds other than the
south-west are commonly supposed to be sent by Biliku. Thus we have
seen that in the A-Pučikwar tribe the different winds are named, each
of them (with the exception of the south-west) being a Bilik.

It comes about, in this way, that the year is divided into two
portions, one of which is specially connected with Biliku (Puluga),
while the other is specially connected with Tarai (Deria). These two
seasons are not quite of equal length. The Tarai season lasts only
while the south-west monsoon is blowing, which, in an average year, is
between four and five months. The other seven months are connected with
Biliku and are divided into three portions, (1) the stormy season of
October and November, (2) the cold season of December to February, and
(3) the hot season of March and April.

There are many points relating to Biliku and Tarai about which there is
no general agreement amongst the tribes, or, in some cases, even within
the same tribe. In the North Andaman Biliku is regarded as female, and
is called Mimi Biliku, while Tarai is male and is called Maia Tarai.
This is so in all the four tribes, Aka-Čari, Aka-Bo, Aka-Ko̱ra and
Aka-J̌eru. A statement that is frequently made by the natives of these
tribes is that Tarai and Biliku are husband and wife. While this is the
most common statement, there are, however, other versions of the
matter. In order to show the lack of uniformity in statements about
Biliku and Tarai in the Northern tribes I reproduce a few extracts from
my note-books written down exactly as they were given to me.

(1) Biliku is the wife of Tarai and they have a child named Perǰido.
(This statement was made to me a great many times in the North Andaman,
and may be regarded as the most usual form of the belief.)

(2) Biliku is the wife of Tarai. Their children are the sun and moon.
(Heard only once.)

(3) The husband of Biliku is Perǰido and her children are Totaimo, Mite
(cicada) and Tarai.

(4) Biliku is unmarried, but she has a son Perǰido, and her other
children are To̱ro̱i, Čelene, Čoto̱t, and Čerei. These four are the names
of birds.

(5) Biliku is the wife of Tarai. Their children are To̱ro̱i, Taka, Čoto̱t,
Poruato̱ko, Kelil, Co̱pcura, Benye, Biratkoro, Čereo, Milidu, Bobelo,
Ko̱lo. These are all names of birds.

(6) Biliku has a husband To̱ro̱i (a bird). Tarai has a wife Kelil (a
bird).

In the Aka-Kede tribe the most common statement, at any rate in the
northern part of the tribe, is that Bilika is female, and that Tarai is
male. One Aka-Kede man, from the southern part of the tribe said that
Bilika was male.

In the Aka-Ko̱l and A-Pučikwar tribes Bilik is generally spoken of as
being male, and Teriya is also male. Other versions from these tribes
are as follows:—

(1) Bilik is female and Teriya is her husband. Their children are the
winds, Čoliatum Bilik, Me̱tepur Bilik, and Wo̱ičo-l’arpat Bilik.

(2) There is a male Bilik and a female Bilik, who are husband and wife.
Their children are Ko̱ičo̱r-to̱ŋ Bilik, Ko̱ičo Bilik, Jila Bilik, Me̱tepur
Bilik, Rartear Bilik, and Teriya. These are the winds.

(3) Bilik is male. His wife is In Čaria, and their children are Kao
(prawn) and Mo̱rua (the sky).

In the Akar-Bale tribe the most usual statement is that both Puluga and
Daria are male, and this was apparently also the common belief of the
Aka-Bea.

In the North Andaman the name Biliku is also the word for “spider,” but
no meaning (save as the name of the mythical being) was discovered for
the name Tarai. In the South and Middle Andaman no meaning was
discovered, either for the name Bilik or Puluga, or for the name Teriya
or Deria. Although this book does not deal with the Little Andaman, it
is worth while to mention that there also the natives believe in a
mythical person who lives in the north-east and sends the storms. This
being is female and is named Öluga. The monitor lizard is also called
öluga in the language of the Little Andaman. It is obvious, however,
that the names Biliku, Puluga, Öluga are all of them different forms of
the same word.

As we have already seen, it is Biliku and Tarai who send the winds.
Tarai sends the south-west wind, which brings the rain. Biliku sends
the other winds which bring either fine weather, or, at times, violent
storms. One Akar-Bale account of the matter (literally translated as
told to me) is as follows. “Once upon a time Puluga and Daria were
great friends, but they quarrelled. Puluga said that he was the bigger
(more important). Daria said that he was. So now they are always
quarrelling. Puluga sends the wind for one period. Then Daria sends his
wind.”

According to the statement of an Akar-Bale man, Puluga makes the wind
by fanning with a very large kwar-toŋ leaf.

Rain and thunder and lightning that come with the south-west wind are
believed to be due to Tarai. Storms that come during the season
connected with Biliku are made by Biliku and are due to her anger. When
a big storm comes the natives say “Biliku is angry.” Lightning is
explained as being a fire-brand thrown by Biliku across the sky when
she is angry, and thunder is said to be her voice growling. Another
explanation of lightning is that it is a pearl-shell, called be in the
North Andaman, thrown by Biliku, the bright flash of the
mother-of-pearl being seen as it crosses the sky. Still another
statement from the North Andaman is that Biliku makes the lightning by
striking a pearl-shell (be) against a stone.

Although Biliku is generally mentioned when a native is asked about
lightning, yet Tarai also wields the lightning and the thunder. On one
occasion when I was talking to a native I referred to the thunder and
lightning that were at the moment coming up from the south-west, making
a remark to the effect that Biliku was getting angry about something,
and was corrected by him with “No, that is Tarai.”

There are a certain number of actions that are believed by the natives
to arouse the anger of Biliku (Puluga), and thereby cause storms. There
are three of these that are of importance.

(1) Burning or melting bees’-wax.

(2) Killing a cicada, or making a noise, particularly a noise of
cutting or banging wood, during the time that the cicada is “singing”
in the morning and evening.

(3) The use of certain articles of food, of which the chief are the
seeds of the Entada scandens, the pith of the Caryota sobolifera, two
species of Dioscorea (yam), and certain edible roots, of which may be
mentioned those called in Aka-J̌eru, labo, mikulu, ǰi and lo̱ito.

In this matter there is an entire unanimity of belief in all the tribes
of the Great Andaman. All the natives agree in saying that any of these
three actions causes the anger of Biliku or Puluga and so brings bad
weather.

The natives do, as a matter of fact, melt all the bees’-wax they
obtain, in order to purify it, and render it suitable for use in the
various ways in which they employ it. Also they do make use of all the
plants mentioned under (3) whenever they are in season. They give
various explanations of this variance between their precepts and their
actions. Some of my informants said that though these actions may bring
rain and storms, yet they would rather submit to the bad weather than
go without some of their most prized vegetable foods. Others again say
that there is always a chance that Biliku may not notice that the
plants have been disturbed, particularly if no fragments are left lying
about the camp, and if, when taking the roots, the creepers are not
disturbed. Another statement is that it is really only during the
season of storms, called the Kimil season in Aka-J̌eru, that it is
dangerous to eat these foods, that is, during the months of October and
November. After this season has passed there is no longer any danger of
violent storms and the foods in question may be freely eaten.
Nevertheless the natives do eat these foods in the months of October
and November.

Mr Man records the native beliefs about bees’-wax and the plants in
question. “There is an idea current that if during the first half of
the rainy season they eat the Caryota sobolifera, or pluck or eat the
seeds of the Entada pursœtha, or gather yams or other edible roots,
another deluge would be the consequence, for Puluga is supposed to
require these for his own consumption at that period of the year; the
restriction, however does not extend to the fallen seeds of the Entada
pursœtha, which may be collected and eaten at any time with impunity.
Another of the offences visited by Puluga with storms is the burning of
bee’s wax, the smell of which is said to be peculiarly obnoxious to
him. Owing to this belief it is a common practice secretly to burn wax
when a person against whom they bear ill-will is engaged in fishing,
hunting, or the like, the object being to spoil his sport and cause him
as much discomfort as possible; hence arises the saying amongst them,
when suddenly overtaken by a storm, that some one must be burning wax
[78].”

It must be noted that it is not only the “burning,” but also the
melting of bees’-wax that angers Puluga. As regards the plants
mentioned by Mr Man none of these is available for food during the
early part of the rainy season. At that time the yams are not formed,
the pith of the Caryota palm is not ripe and is uneatable, and the only
available seeds of the Entada would be those of the last season that
had not fallen from the pods or that had lain on the ground without
having germinated. Thus the prohibition as stated by Mr Man amounts to
nothing. The subject will be discussed in a later chapter. It may be
remarked, however, that it is a fact easily to be observed that the
natives do regard the gathering of these vegetable foods during the
later portion of the rainy season and during the first part of the cool
season (i.e. from October to December), as being an action that may
offend Biliku. I was myself able to observe this on several occasions,
as when once, at the very end of the rainy season, I, not then knowing
the belief, asked a native to cut for me one of the pods of the Entada
as a botanical specimen, whereupon the native, after fulfilling my
request, explained to me that there would probably be a storm next day
as the result of our action.

In all the tribes of the Great Andaman I found a belief that Biliku or
Puluga will be angry if anybody makes a noise, particularly a noise of
chopping, breaking or banging wood, during the time the cicada is
singing. The cicada “sings” as the natives call it, during the short
interval between dawn and sunrise, and during that between sunset and
darkness. It is at these times that no noise may be made. The
Andamanese do observe this custom, and refrain from making any noise at
such times. For instance, if a man were singing, he would cease until
the cicada were silent again. In all the tribes I found that this
prohibition was connected in the minds of the natives with Puluga, the
reason of the custom being always explained to me by saying that any
breach of it would infallibly bring bad weather. In the North Andaman
the cicada (mite) is commonly spoken of as the “child” of Biliku,
Biliku ot-tire.

Mr Man refers to this custom. In one place he says that the first
parents of the Andamanese were told by Puluga “that, though they were
to work in the wet months, they must not do so after sundown, because
by doing so they would worry the butu, which are under Puluga’s special
protection. Any noise, such as working (kopke) with an adze, would
cause the butu’s head to ache, and that would be a serious matter.
During the cold and dry seasons work may be carried on day and night,
as the butu is then seldom seen, and cannot be disturbed [79].”

The butu here mentioned is the cicada. The prohibition is not, however,
as Mr Man says, against working, but against making a noise. Nor does
the prohibition against noise extend to the whole night, but only to
the short interval between sunset and darkness, for it is during this
interval that the cicada is singing. As soon as the cicada is silent
you may make as much noise as you please.

Another reference by Mr Man to the same custom is as follows: “Between
dawn and sunrise they will do no work, save what is noiseless, lest the
sun should be offended and cause an eclipse, storm, or other misfortune
to overtake them. If, therefore, they have occasion to start on a
journey or hunting expedition at so early an hour, they proceed as
quietly as possible, and refrain from the practice, observed at other
times of the day, of testing the strength of their bow-strings, as the
snapping noise caused thereby is one of those to which the sun objects
[80].”

This is really the same prohibition as that already mentioned, against
making a noise when the cicada is singing. The interesting point, which
will be discussed in a later chapter, is that Mr Man’s informant
associated the prohibition not with Puluga, but with the sun. All the
natives with whom I talked on the matter said that they would make no
noise at such a time for fear of offending the cicada, and therefore
Puluga or Biliku, and so bringing a storm.

As regards the prohibition against killing the cicada, this seems to
refer only to the imago. So far as I was able to observe, the natives
do carefully avoid killing the cicada in its full-grown form. On the
other hand the grub of the cicada is regularly killed and eaten, being
regarded as a delicacy. It is only eaten during the months of October
and November.

In connection with the cicada, and with the weather, there is a rite
which was described to me, but which I did not see performed. According
to the account given of this rite, which is called “killing the
cicada,” its purpose is to produce fine weather. It takes place in
December, at the end of the season during which they eat the grub. When
the time agreed upon for the performance of the ceremony arrives, all
the members of the community are careful to be in the camp before
sunset. As soon as the sun sets and the cicadæ begin their shrill cry,
all the men, women and children present begin to make as much noise as
they possibly can, by banging on the sounding-board, striking the
ground with bamboos, beating pieces of wood together, or hammering on
the sides of canoes, while at the same time shouting. They continue the
noise, which entirely drowns that of the cicada, until after darkness
has fallen. The rite may be performed, I believe, two or more times, on
successive evenings. My informant explained the rite by saying that the
natives have been eating the cicada, and the rite is intended to “kill”
those that are left. After the rite the cicada disappears and is not
seen or heard for some weeks, and there follow four months of fine
weather with little rain.

The beliefs relating to bees’-wax, to the various edible roots, and to
the cicada, are the same in all the Great Andaman tribes, and are by
far the most important of those connected with Biliku. In the North
Andaman Biliku is supposed to be angry if any one kills a biliku
(spider), a reo (a species of insect making a noise like a cicada,
during the daytime, which I often heard, but never saw), or a čatlo (a
species of beetle). There is also a bird, which I was not able to
identify, called to̱ro̱i, which belongs to Biliku and may not be killed.

In the A-Pučikwar tribe it is said that two species of fish, called
unakoro and liwat belong to Bilik and may not be killed. A mollusc,
called towa, also belongs to Bilik, and is for that reason never eaten.
A bird called Bilik-l’ar-dala (probably the same bird that is called
to̱ro̱i in the North Andaman) may not be killed.

In the Akar-Bale tribe I was told that two kinds of wood, bukura and
worago, must not be used for firewood, for fear of offending Puluga, to
whom they belong. Bukura is a species of Diospyros (ebony).

The only punishment that Biliku ever inflicts on human beings when she
is angry with them for any reason, is to send violent storms. The way
to stop a storm seems to be to frighten Biliku. One means of doing this
is to throw the leaves of the Mimusops littoralis in the fire. These
leaves explode with the heating of the juices and make a crackling or
popping noise, which it is said that Biliku dislikes. I believe,
however, that if any one were thus to burn Mimusops leaves during fine
weather, it would be regarded as likely to cause a storm. The most
efficacious means of stopping a storm is to do some of the things that
Biliku most dislikes. To burn bees’-wax, or to go into the jungle and
damage or destroy the creepers that belong to her, these are the heroic
remedies against Biliku’s anger.

The question of the Andamanese beliefs about storms is complicated by
the fact that although all storms are said to be made by Puluga or
Biliku, yet there is an alternative and contradictory belief that
storms are made by the spirits of the sea (J̌urua). It is said that if a
piece of the Anadendron paniculatum creeper were to be burnt there
would be a great cyclone, but this appears to be associated, not with
Biliku, but with the spirits of the sea. It will be shown later that
there is a special connection between the J̌urua and this plant. The
belief that a storm will arise if turtle fat be allowed to burn in the
fire seems also to be connected with the J̌urua and not with Biliku. The
same is probably the case with a belief that rain will come if a Ficus
laccifera tree be damaged.

Some of the methods used to stop storms are also probably connected
with the spirits and not with Biliku. One such method is to go into the
sea and swish arrows about in the water. One oko-ǰumu (medicine-man) of
the North Andaman is reputed to have stopped a big cyclone by taking a
few pieces of Anadendron paniculatum and crushing them, and then diving
into the sea and placing the crushed creeper under a stone. An oko-ǰumu
who died while I was in the islands is supposed to have been able to
stop a storm by similarly placing leaves and twigs of the Ficus
laccifera (reŋko) under a rock in the sea.

To complete the account of this part of the Andamanese beliefs it is
necessary to quote what Mr Man writes about the tribes of the South
Andaman. Mr Man describes Puluga as a “Supreme Being” and says that
some of the beliefs of the Andamanese relating to him “approximate
closely to the true faith concerning the Deity.” Mr Portman, following
Mr Man, in this as in many other matters, translates the name Puluga by
the English word “God.” Mr Man’s statements are as follows:—

“Of Puluga they say that—

“I. Though His appearance is like fire, yet He is (nowadays) invisible.

“II. He was never born and is immortal.

“III. By him the world and all objects, animate and inanimate were
created, excepting only the powers of evil.

“IV. He is regarded as omniscient while it is day, knowing even the
thoughts of their hearts.

“V. He is angered by the commission of certain sins, while to those in
pain or distress he is pitiful, and sometimes deigns to afford relief.

“VI. He is the Judge from whom each soul receives its sentence after
death, and to some extent, the hope of escape from the torments of
J̌ereg-l’ar-mugu is said to affect their course of action in the present
life.

“Puluga is believed to live in a large stone house in the sky, with a
wife whom he created for himself: she is green in appearance and has
two names, Čana Aulola (Mother Fresh-water Shrimp), and Čana Palak
(Mother Eel); by her he has a large family, all, except the eldest,
being girls; these last, known as morowin (sky spirits or angels), are
said to be black in appearance, and, with their mother, amuse
themselves from time to time by throwing fish and prawns into the
streams and sea for the use of the inhabitants of the world. Puluga’s
son is called Piǰčor: he is regarded as a sort of archangel, and is
alone permitted to live with his father, whose orders it is his duty to
make known to the morowin.

“Puluga is said to eat and drink, and, during the dry months of the
year, to pass much of his time in sleep, as is proved by his voice
(thunder) being rarely heard at that season; he is the source whence
they receive all their supplies of animals, birds, and turtles; when
they anger him he comes out of his house and blows, and growls, and
hurls burning faggots at them—in other words, visits their offences
with violent thunderstorms and heavy squalls; except for this purpose
he seldom leaves home, unless it be during the rains, when he descends
to earth to provide himself with certain kinds of food; how often this
happens they do not know since, nowadays, he is invisible [81].”

Mr Man’s comparison between the Andamanese belief in Puluga and the
Christian belief in a God, will be discussed in a later chapter when we
come to deal with the interpretation of the Andamanese beliefs. It is
to be noted that Mr Man does not make any reference to Deria (Tarai),
nor does he mention the association of Puluga with the north-east.

As regards the personal appearance of Puluga, the statements of
different informants are not in agreement. One A-Pučikwar man described
Bilik as being very big, about the height of one of the posts of my hut
(which was eighteen feet), white-skinned like a European, having a long
beard, and carrying a bow of the J̌a̤rawa type.

The legends connecting Puluga with the creation of the world will be
given in the next chapter.

I am not able to confirm Mr Man’s statement that Puluga is omniscient,
and in fact there are some customs of the natives that are in
contradiction with any such belief. When they dig up yams (which belong
to Puluga) they take the tuber and replace the “crown” with the
attached stem in the ground, and explain this by saying that if they do
so Puluga will not notice that the yam has been taken. Whenever they do
any of the things that displease Puluga, they seem to believe that
there is a possibility that Puluga may not discover what has been done.
It may be noted that there is no means of distinguishing in Andamanese
between “all” and “a great deal.” Thus a statement the Puluga knows
“everything” may be equally well translated “Puluga knows a great
deal.” Between these two statements there is no difference for the
Andamanese, but there is a great difference for us, and for this reason
the use of the word “omniscient” is misleading.

Mr Man says that Puluga “is angered by the commission of certain sins.”
In this connection it is necessary to refer to another passage in Mr
Man’s work. “That they are not entirely devoid of moral consciousness
may, I think, in some measure, be demonstrated by the fact of their
possessing a word, yub-da, signifying sin or wrong-doing, which is used
in connection with falsehood, theft, grave assault, murder, adultery,
and—burning wax (!), which deeds are believed to anger Puluga-la, the
Creator [82].” Although I made very careful and repeated enquiries, I
was unable to meet with a single native who believed that such actions
as the murder of one man by another, or adultery, aroused the anger of
Puluga. The only actions at which Puluga is angry are those purely
ritual offences, such as burning or melting wax, killing a cicada,
digging up yams, etc., which have already been mentioned.

The Andamanese beliefs connected with the life after death will be
described later in the present chapter.

As regards the “stone house” in which Puluga is said to live, this
really means, I believe, a cave. In the North Andaman Biliku is
frequently spoken of as living in a cave (e̱ra-poŋ). Also, it may be
recalled, the sky is generally regarded as consisting of stone or rock,
and it is in the sky the Puluga lives.

The son of Puluga, mentioned by Mr Man, Piǰčor, is a being about whom I
was able to learn very little. In the North Andaman the same being is
named Perǰido, and is said to be the son of Biliku. The Morowin, whom
Mr Man describes as the daughters of Puluga, are sky spirits. The most
usual belief in the South Andaman is that there are both male and
female Morowin. They are beings of somewhat the same nature as the
jungle spirits and the sea spirits. An Akar-Bale informant told me,
“The Morua are sky spirits. They eat only pork and nothing else. They
are angry if pork is roasted, and make the people ill. They used to
live in the big baǰa (Sterculia) trees, but now they live in the sky.”

In this connection it may be mentioned that there is a belief
throughout the Andamans that it is dangerous to roast pork. In the
North Andaman the natives commonly say that the spirits of the jungle
are angry if pork be roasted, and may be attracted to the spot and
cause the natives to be ill. An Akar-Bale belief, connecting the danger
with the spirits of the sky has just been mentioned. Mr Man’s version
of the matter is as follows:— “... there is a company of evil spirits
who are called čol, and who are much dreaded. They are believed to be
descendants of Maia Čol who lived in antediluvian times. They generally
punish those who offend them by baking or roasting pig’s flesh, the
smell of which is particularly obnoxious to them, as it is also to
Puluga, who therefore, often assists them in discovering the
delinquent; the same risk does not attend boiling pork, which the
olfactory nerves of the fastidious čol are not keen enough to detect.
While the Andamanese say that they are liable to be struck by
E̱rem-čauga-la or J̌uruwin at any time or in any place, the čol strike
those only who offend them, and that during the day while they are
stationary, this being necessitated by the distance from the earth of
their abode, whence they hurl their darts; an invisible spear is the
weapon they always use, and this is thrown with unerring aim at the
head of their victims, and is invariably fatal. As these demons are
considered especially dangerous on the hottest days, they are
apparently held accountable for the deaths from sunstroke which happen
from time to time [83].”

It may be remarked that Čol is the name of a species of bird (probably
the racket-tailed drongo), which is named from its call—čol, čol, čol.
I did not hear the name used to denote what Mr Man calls demons, except
in so far as the birds themselves are supposed to have supernatural
powers. There is, perhaps, some sort of connection between the čol (the
birds, that is) and the sky-spirits, Morowin or Morua, but I was not
able to satisfy myself on the point. The connection of them both with
Puluga is still more obscure.

Another belief in connection with pigs is that any person who cuts up a
pig badly is liable to be punished. Mr Man states, on this subject,
“Puluga never himself puts any one to death, but he objects so strongly
to seeing a pig badly quartered and carved that he invariably points
out those who offend him in this respect to a class of malevolent
spirits called Čol, one of whom forthwith despatches the unfortunate
individual [84].”

I was not able to find any evidence that Puluga is believed to be angry
if a pig is badly quartered. From the natives with whom I talked on the
subject I received two different statements. One was to the effect that
if a pig is badly cut up the meat will be bad and anyone who eats it
will be ill. The other was that if a pig is badly cut up the spirits of
the jungle will be angry and will punish the offender. In neither case
was there any reference to Puluga or Biliku.

In general it may be said that the natives believe that the only
punishment that Puluga or Biliku ever sends against those who offend
him or her in any way is bad weather, and I did not myself meet with
any exception to this rule.

One other observation by Mr Man may be mentioned. He says, “When they
see a dark cloud approaching at a time when rain would prove very
inconvenient, as when hunting, travelling, etc., they advise Puluga to
divert its course by shouting ‘Wara-J̌obo kopke, kopke, kopke’
(Wara-J̌obo will bite, bite, bite (you)). If in spite of this a shower
falls they imagine that Puluga is undeterred by their warning [85].”

It is clear from the above discussion of the matter that there is not
any complete agreement in the beliefs concerning Puluga (Biliku) even
in any one tribe of the Andamans. There are many different statements
about this being which cannot be made consistent with one another
without doing violence to the evidence. At the same time, amid all the
differences and inconsistencies there are a certain number of points
about which there is a general agreement throughout the whole of the
tribes of the Great Andaman. One of these is the connection of Puluga
and Daria with the weather, with the two chief winds, and with the
points of the compass from which these winds blow. The other is the
belief that certain actions, such as melting bees’-wax, digging up
yams, etc., are disliked by Puluga, and are punished by him (or her)
with stormy weather. On these matters there is entire agreement amongst
the natives of all the tribes, and they are to the natives themselves
by far the most important part of the beliefs concerning Puluga.

We have seen that the Andamanese believe in two different kinds of what
may be called, for want of a better term, supernatural beings. In the
first place there are the spirits, the Lau or Čauga, and the J̌urua,
inhabiting the forest and the sea respectively. These are all
associated by the natives with ghosts, i.e. with the spirits of dead
men and women. In the second place there are other beings connected
with the sun and moon, lightning and thunder and the monsoons (Biliku
and Tarai). These are all associated with the phenomena of nature.
There are many points of contact between these two classes of beings.
Thus there are two alternative explanations of bad weather, one that it
is due to the spirits (particularly the spirits of the sea), the other
that it is due to the anger of Biliku. This is a point that will be
referred to again in a later chapter.

It is possible that there are beliefs in other supernatural beings who
are neither spirits of the dead nor connected with natural phenomena.
The only being of such a nature that I was able to discover anything
about is one called Nila or Ńila. This is the name of an evil being who
is supposed to live in hollow Pterocarpus trees. When he smells human
beings near his tree he comes out and kills them with his knife. I
found this belief in the A-Pučikwar tribe, but was not able to find any
trace of a similar belief in the North Andaman, though of course I
cannot say that it does not exist there. Mr Man mentions this same
being. “This spirit Nila is supposed to live in ant-hills, and to have
neither wife nor child; he is not regarded as such a malevolent
personage as Erem-čauga-la, and, though he is always armed with a
knife, he rarely injures human beings with it, or when he does so, it
is not in order to feed upon their bodies, for he is said to eat earth
only [86].” Mr Man adds, in a footnote that “cases have been cited of
persons who have been found stabbed, whose deaths have been attributed
to Nila: the possibility of the individuals in question having been
murdered is scouted.”

The version given by Mr Man is not quite in agreement with the
information given to me, but I was unfortunately not able to learn
anything more about the nature of Nila.

As throwing some additional light on the way in which the Andamanese
think of the supernatural beings that have been mentioned above, I add
here a brief description of a sort of dramatic or pantomimic dance that
I witnessed in the North Andaman. Many savage tribes in different parts
of the world are in the habit of performing dances or pantomimes in
which the performer represents a supernatural being. In the Andamans
there are no regular performances of this kind. The solitary one that I
witnessed was entirely exceptional.

The performer was a man named Kobo. This man, according to the
statements of the natives, had, at one time of his life, died and come
back to life again. Owing to this fact he was endowed with special
magical powers, and had some reputation as a magician or medicine-man
(oko-ǰumu). During the time that he was dead (probably a few hours of
unconsciousness), he is supposed to have visited the world of spirits,
and while there he saw many things and learnt much about the spirits.
Among other things he witnessed a dance in which the spirits and other
supernatural beings took part. All these things he was able to remember
when he returned to life.

The performance was given one afternoon on the ordinary dancing ground
of the village. The performer sat on his haunches in a hut at one end
of the dancing ground. Thrust into the back of his belt he wore a bunch
of leaves sticking out somewhat after the manner of a cock’s tail, but
he had no other ornament. The spectators, consisting of men, women and
children, were seated round the edge of the dancing ground, which had
been swept clean. On one side sat a few women who acted as chorus.
There was no sounding-board.

The performer began to sing a song, composed on the model of the songs
of the South Andaman (with a short refrain) which has now for some
years been adopted by the Northern tribes in preference to their own.
As he finished the song the women of the chorus took up the refrain,
repeating it over and over again, and marking time by clapping their
hands on their thighs. The performer came out of his hut and performed
a dance. At a signal from him the chorus ceased and he returned to his
hut. In this way he sang several songs, repeating each one several
times, and performed a number of short dances. In nearly every case the
step of the dance was some simple modification of the step in common
use at an ordinary dance. Thus in one dance he danced very violently
and pretended to hurt his leg through the violence of his dancing,
making angry signs to the chorus to stop their clapping, of which, of
course, they took no notice. In another dance he stopped at short
intervals and violently scratched his sides and then doubled himself up
with laughter. In yet another, he danced with the step of the women’s
dance, covering his face with his hands and pretending to be very
bashful. In still another he stood on tiptoe on the right foot and
stamped with his left foot in time to the chorus of women. In some of
the dances he walked round the open space within the circle of
spectators, sometimes in a crouching attitude, and at other times in
other attitudes. All these dances aroused great amusement amongst the
spectators. It was unfortunately impossible for me to understand them
all or to obtain an adequate explanation of them either at the time or
later.

Of the songs that were sung one was “The tide has gone down over the
reef. I walk round the world. There is great wind and rain.”

Some of these dances I was able to understand even without explanation.
One of them represented Biliku. The performer held in his right hand a
shell, and as he danced grotesquely round the open space he looked
fiercely at the spectators and threatened to throw the shell at them.
Many of the women and children could not prevent themselves from
starting backwards when he thus threatened them, but their fears were
immediately dispelled in laughter. The shell was not a pearl-shell (be)
but a Cyrena shell (bun), but I believe that this was because there was
no pearl-shell available. The representation of Biliku was thus reduced
to a single gesture, that of threatening the natives with her
pearl-shell (lightning).

Another dance represented the jungle spirits (Bido-teč Lau). In this he
first hid himself behind a screen of bido leaves (Calamus tigrinus)
that had been prepared, singing a song. The leaves represented a clump
of the Calamus palm such as is supposed to be the favourite haunt of
the jungle spirits. After having sung for some time behind his screen
of leaves, he came out with a bow and arrow in his hand, and as he
danced in front of the spectators he pretended to shoot at them.

In another dance he represented Ele, the lightning. He sat on a stone
that had been placed in the middle of the open space, swinging his arms
to the time of the chorus, and every now and then shaking his leg.

This observation is an important one in several ways. Although I asked
the man to repeat it, in order that I might make fuller notes and
obtain explanations of many obscure points, and although he grudgingly
said that he would, yet he did not do so. He was, moreover, very
reserved over the matter, and not very willing to talk about his own
performance.

I believe that the performance was an entirely exceptional affair. I
never at any other time either saw or heard of one man or even several
men, giving a dance for the amusement of others. I think that the whole
thing was entirely the invention of the performer. He had given the
same performance, or one very similar, at least once before the
occasion on which I saw it.

We may now turn to the Andamanese beliefs relating to the soul and the
life after death.

The vital principle is at different times identified by the Andamanese
with the pulse, the breath, with the blood and with the fat,
particularly the kidney-fat. Thus the body of a slain enemy is burnt so
that the blood and fat may be consumed in smoke and ascend to the sky
where they will no longer be a danger to those who have slain him.

The nearest approach to our notion of a soul that the natives possess
is their belief concerning the double or reflection seen in a mirror.
In the Northern tribes the word ot-ǰumulo means “reflection,” and also
“shadow,” and is also nowadays applied to a photograph. The word
ot-ǰumu, in the same languages, means “a dream” or “to dream.” We may
perhaps translate the word ot-ǰumulo as meaning “soul.” In the Aka-Bea
language ot-yolo is “reflection,” while there is a different word,
ot-diya or ot-lere, for “shadow,” and neither of the words has any
connection with the word “dream” which is taraba. Mr Man translates the
word ot-yolo as “soul.”

The fact that the words for dream and reflection, double or shadow are
from the same root in the Northern languages is of interest. Dreams are
sometimes explained by saying that the sleeper’s double (ot-ǰumulo) has
left his body and is wandering elsewhere. Dreams are regarded as being
veridical, or at any rate, as having importance. One man told me how,
in a dream the night before, his ot-ǰumulo had travelled from where we
were to his own country and had there seen the death of the baby of a
woman of his own tribe. He was fully convinced that the baby must
really have died.

An Andamanese will never, or only with the very greatest reluctance,
awaken another from sleep. One explanation of this that was given to me
was that the ot-ǰumulo or double of the sleeper may be wandering far
from his body, and to waken him suddenly might cause him to be ill.

The principle on which dreams are interpreted is a very simple one. All
unpleasant dreams are bad, all pleasant ones are good. The natives
believe that sickness is often caused by dreams. A man in the early
stages of an attack of fever, for instance, may have a bad dream. When
the fever develops he explains it as due to the dream. If a man has a
painful dream he will often not venture out of the camp the following
day, but will stay at home until the effect has worn off. The natives
believe that they can communicate in dreams with the spirits, but the
power to do this regularly is the privilege of certain special
individuals, known as oko-ǰumu (dreamers). However, an ordinary
individual may occasionally have dreams of this kind.

I found that any attempt to study the dreams of such a people as the
Andamanese is made very difficult by the fact that it is never possible
to tell how far the original dream has been arranged and altered by the
waking imagination. So far as my observations went the majority of
dreams are either visual or motor, or both. Further reference to dreams
will be made later in connection with magic.

When a man or woman dies the double (or as some of the natives explain
it, the breath) leaves the body and becomes a spirit (lau or čauga). By
death a man ceases to exist as a man, and begins a new existence as a
spirit.

Whenever I asked the natives whence came the spirits of the jungle and
the sea I received the answer that they are the spirits of dead men and
women. On the other hand, when I put in another form what might seem to
be the same question, and asked what became of a man’s spirit after his
death, I received many different and inconsistent answers. As it would
take too much space to transcribe every answer that I received to this
question, a number of typical ones are selected. Any attempt to
reconcile the statements of different men or of the same men on
different occasions can only produce a false impression of the real
condition of the native beliefs, and therefore the statements are kept
separate, and each one is given as it was taken down.

The first is from the Northern tribes. Exactly similar statements were
made to me by men of several tribes. “When a man dies he becomes a Lau
and wanders about the jungle. At first he keeps near the grave or the
place where he died, but after a while he finds that is no good, and so
he goes to live with the other spirits. If he is drowned he becomes a
J̌urua.” A second account, varying from the above in only one
particular, is also from one of the Northern tribes (Aka-Čari). “When a
man dies he becomes a Lau or a J̌urua and lives with the other spirits.
If he be a jungle-dweller he becomes a Lau and lives in the jungle. If
he be a coast-dweller he becomes a J̌urua and lives in the sea. All the
Aka-Čari become J̌urua when they die. The spirit stays in his own
country. The spirits of a man’s own country (whether Lau or J̌urua) are
friendly to him, but those of another country are dangerous and will
make him ill.”

An entirely different statement frequently made to me by men of the
Northern tribes is that when a man dies the spirit (Lau) either
immediately, or after the lapse of some time, goes to another world
that lies under this one and is called Maramiku. This world of spirits
is said to be just like the actual world, with forest and sea, and all
the familiar animal and vegetable species. The inhabitants spend their
time just as the Andamanese do on earth, hunting, fishing and dancing.

Still another statement that is commonly made in the North is that the
spirits of the dead go to live in the sky. Two such statements are as
follows: “When a man dies his ot-ǰumulo (double) goes up to the sky and
becomes a Lau (spirit).” “A man’s spirit wanders in the jungle till the
flesh has rotted from the bones, and then goes away to the sky.” Other
statements were very similar to these two.

Turning now to the Southern tribes, one informant of the A-Pučikwar
tribe gave me the following account: “When a man or woman dies the
spirit goes away to the east or north-east and goes over the edge of
the world, remaining in a place called Lau-l’uŋ-ciŋ (Spirit’s House)
where there is a large hut in a jungle similar to that on earth. There
they live just as men do on earth, hunting and fishing, and so on.
Beyond the home of the spirits is Puta-ko̱iča, the home of the sun and
moon. The rainbow is the path by which the spirits come to visit their
friends on earth, which they do in dreams. The rainbow is made of canes
(? a cane).”

Another version from the same tribe was to the effect that after death
the spirits of the dead go to live in the sky with a mythical being
named Tomo. This Tomo, according to some of the legends, was the first
ancestor of the Andamanese. By one of my best informants he was
identified to some extent with the sun, and consequently with light and
with fine weather. This man stated that in the world of the spirits it
is never night as Tomo is always there. The spirits always have plenty
of pork and turtle, and spend their time dancing and enjoying
themselves.

One old man of the A-Pučikwar tribe, who had some reputation as a
medicine-man, said that the spirits of medicine-men lived apart from
the spirits of ordinary men and women, and are called not Lau but
Bilik. He told me how he had been visited in a dream by Bo̱ičo Bilik;
that is by the spirit of one Bo̱ičo who had, when he lived, been a great
medicine-man, and who, now that he was dead, had become a Bilik, as
distinguished from an ordinary Lau. It is the Bilik who control the
weather. They can also cause or cure sickness in living men. The Bo̱ičo
mentioned above was alive when my informant was a young man.

In the Akar-Bale tribe one man told me that the breath (ig-peti) of a
dying person goes up to the sky and becomes a spirit. Another belief of
the same tribe is that the spirits of the dead go to J̌ereg-l’ar-mugu,
which is under the earth. From the same tribe comes the following
account: “When a man or woman dies, the spirit first of all goes
southward to the country of the Aka-Bea, and then returns to
Gudna-l’ar-boŋ in Kuaičo-bur (in the Akar-Bale country). It then goes
to J̌ila-buaro in J̌ila (East Island) and from there to Kere-tuaur. The
inhabitants of the last-named place are warned of the approach of the
spirit by the cries of the birds tao (Eudynamis honorata, Indian koel
or brain-fever bird) and bil (Australian goggle-eyed plover). At one
time the people of Luŋ-tauar used to catch the spirits in big nets made
for the purpose. They were taught to do this by a wise woman named In
Golat. The spirits try to run away, but they get caught at the place
called Guamo-leber. The people then throw them into the sea, and they
(the spirits) then go to Čauga-l’uŋ-jiŋa (Spirit’s Home) and remain
there.” The above is given exactly as it was translated to me by an
Akar-Bale man who knew English and who acted as my interpreter on the
occasion. There is much in it that I do not understand and that my
questions failed to elucidate. It is given as an example of the nature
of some of the more obscure of the Andamanese beliefs. To understand
fully many of their statements on this and other matters would need a
more complete knowledge of the language than I possessed, and a longer
time than I was able to give.

The various examples given above are sufficient to show the general
nature of the Andamanese beliefs. In every tribe there are alternative
and inconsistent beliefs as to the place where spirits go, which by
different accounts is in the sky, beneath the earth, out to the east
where the sun and moon take their rise, or in the jungle and sea of
their own country. One thing is clear, that the Andamanese ideas on the
subject are floating and lacking in precision. There is no fixity or
unanimity of belief amongst them.

To these various accounts from the natives themselves, must be added
the description of the beliefs of the Aka-Bea tribe as recorded by Mr
Man. This may best be given in the writer’s own words. “The world,
exclusive of the sea, is declared to be flat and to rest on an immense
palm-tree (Caryota sobolifera) called barata, which stands in the midst
of a jungle comprising the whole area under the earth. This jungle,
čaitan (Hades) is a gloomy place, for, though visited in turn by the
sun and moon, it can, in consequence of its situation, be only
partially lighted: it is hither the spirits (čauga) of the departed are
sent by Puluga to await the Resurrection.

“No change takes place in čaitan in respect to growth or age; all
remain as they were at the time of their departure from the earth, and
the adults are represented as engaged in hunting, after a manner
peculiar to disembodied spirits. In order to furnish them with sport
the spirits of animals and birds are also sent to čaitan, but as there
is no sea there, the čauga of fish and turtle remain in their native
element and are preyed upon by ǰuruwin. The spirits (čauga) and souls
(ot-yolo) of all children who die before they cease to be entirely
dependent on their parents (i.e. under six years of age) go to čaitan,
and are placed under a rau tree (Ficus laccifera) on the fruit of which
they subsist. As none can quit čaitan who have once entered, they
support their stories regarding it by a tradition that in ages long
past an oko-paiad was favoured in a dream with a vision of the regions
and of the pursuits of the disembodied spirits.

“Between the earth and the eastern sky there stretches an invisible
cane bridge (pidga-l’ar-čauga) which steadies the former and connects
it with ǰereg (paradise); over this bridge the souls (ot-yolo) of the
departed pass into paradise, or to ǰereg-l’ar-mugu, which is situated
below it: this latter place might be described as purgatory, for it is
a place of punishment for those who have been guilty of heinous sins,
such as murder. Like Dante, they depict it as very cold, and therefore
a most undesirable region for mortals to inhabit. From all this it will
be gathered that these despised savages believe in a future state, in
the resurrection, and in the threefold constitution of man.

“In serious illness the sufferer’s spirit (čauga) is said to be
hovering between this world and Hades, but does not remain permanently
in the latter place until some time after death, during which interval
it haunts the abode of the deceased and the spot where the remains have
been deposited. In dreams it is the soul which, having taken its
departure through the nostrils, sees or is engaged in the manner
represented to the sleeper.

“The Andamanese do not regard their shadows but their reflections (in
any mirror) as their souls. The colour of the soul is said to be red,
and that of the spirit black, and, though invisible to human eyes, they
partake of the form of the person to whom they belong. Evil emanates
from the soul, and all good from the spirit; at the resurrection they
will be re-united and live permanently on the new earth, for the souls
of the wicked will then have been reformed by the punishments inflicted
on them during their residence in ǰereg-l’ar-mugu.

“The future life will be but a repetition of the present, but all will
then remain in the prime of life, sickness and death will be unknown,
and there will be no more marrying or giving in marriage. The animals,
birds, and fish will also re-appear in the new world in their present
form.

“This blissful state will be inaugurated by a great earthquake, which,
occurring by Puluga’s command, will break the pidga-l’ar-čauga and
cause the earth to turn over: all alive at the time will perish,
exchanging places with their deceased ancestors [87].”

This account given by Mr Man, must, I think, be received with great
caution. To one who has talked to the Andamanese on these subjects it
seems probable that Mr Man has here combined into a single consistent
version, a number of independent statements, which, as the natives
believe them, are not parts of an organised doctrine, but are separate
from and often inconsistent with each other. Added to this there is the
fact that Mr Man has so written down the native beliefs as to bring out
the greatest possible degree of resemblance to the Christian mythology.
This is clear from his use of the words Hades, paradise, etc. Allowance
must therefore be made for the fact that Mr Man evidently found some
pleasure in tracing analogies between the mythology of the Andamanese
and the Christian doctrines.

Owing to the importance attaching to all Mr Man’s statements it is
necessary to examine critically the account transcribed above. We may
begin with what is said of the doctrine of the threefold nature of man.
By this it would seem to be meant that man is regarded as composed of
body, soul and spirit. It is quite certain that the Andamanese mean
different things by the words ot-yolo (reflection) here translated
“soul,” and čauga translated “spirit.” The difference is this, that a
man, while he is still alive, has a “double” or “soul” if the latter
word be preferred, while when he is dead he becomes a spirit. Thus the
spirit is not a part of a man while he is alive. The word čauga (or
lau) is simply the name of a particular class of beings which includes
all dead men and women. The bones of a man become “spirit-bones”
(čauga-ta) when he dies, just as he becomes a spirit. To compare the
Andamanese belief with the Christian doctrine that each man possesses,
while he is alive, both a soul and a spirit, these being different
things, is therefore misleading. For this reason it is perhaps
unfortunate to translate the Andamanese čauga as meaning spirit, but
there does not seem to be any other convenient English word.

Mr Man’s account would seem to imply that the native belief is that at
death the soul (reflection) of a man goes to one place (J̌ereg or
J̌ereg-l’ar-mugu) while his spirit goes elsewhere (to Čaitan). In the
case of children however, Mr Man makes a difference, for both the souls
and spirits of children go to Čaitan. Mr Man compares Čaitan to Hades,
J̌ereg to paradise and J̌ereg-l’ar-mugu to purgatory.

I do not think that the Andamanese have any such complicated doctrine
as this. It seems to me almost certain that Mr Man has received from
the natives several different statements, similar to some of those
given earlier, and that he has combined and reconciled them as well as
he could. Some of his informants, apparently, described the world after
death as being beneath the earth, and gave the name of it as Čaitan
[88]. Other informants seem to have spoken of [vJ]ereg or
J̌ereg-l’ar-mugu. I think it improbable that any one native should have
stated, as Mr Man’s account would seem to imply, that the soul of a
dead man goes to one place, while the man himself (now a spirit) goes
somewhere else. Mr Man’s description of Čaitan corresponds almost
exactly to the descriptions given to me by the Akar-Bale and A-Pučikwar
of J̌ereg-l’ar-mugu, and to the descriptions of Maramiku given by the
Northern tribes. If Čaitan be really an Aka-Bea word, it would seem to
be only another name for J̌ereg-l’ar-mugu.

One of the most important points in Mr Man’s statement is that while
the souls of good men go to paradise as he puts it, the souls of bad
men are condemned to torture in purgatory [89]. In my own enquiries I
did not come across any definite belief of this nature, but I am not
prepared to deny its existence. All that I can say is that I did not
find any evidence whatever that good men and bad men (in any meanings
in which those words could be used by the natives) receive different
treatment after death. In talking to men of the Akar-Bale and
A-Pučikwar tribes I did not hear of J̌ereg as a distinct place from
J̌ereg-l’ar-mugu. The latter name is of course a compound, from ar-mugu
= front, and might mean either “the place fronting or facing J̌ereg” or
“the place J̌ereg, fronting us.”

Mr Man states that the souls and spirits of young children go to Čaitan
where they subsist on the fruit of a rau tree (Ficus laccifera). In the
North Andaman I found a belief that the souls of children, before they
are born, live in the Ficus trees, but these are the real trees on
earth that are in question, and not a mythical tree in the next world.
It is commonly believed that if a baby dies the soul enters the mother
again and is born a second time. It is possible that what Mr Man
relates as to the souls of children after death living in a Ficus tree
in Čaitan may really refer to real fig trees on earth.

As regards the resurrection spoken of by Mr Man, I was also so
unfortunate as to obtain no information. As will be shown in a later
chapter, there are several myths of the world coming to an end and
starting afresh, and these myths are generally associated with Puluga
or Biliku. All the versions that I heard, however, referred to the past
and not to the future [90].

The Andamanese speak of unconsciousness as “death,” and regard a person
who has been unconscious for some time as having been dead and returned
to life again. I was once told that an old man in the village was
“dead” and found him in a state of coma from which he recovered and
lived for several days. There are stories of persons having returned to
life even after they have been buried. One such tale was told me in the
North Andaman. A man died and was buried. As his friends and relatives,
after packing up their belongings, were leaving the camp in their
canoes, the man’s voice was heard calling. His wife and mother turned
back and met him and took him in their canoe. He lived for some time
after this and then he died and was buried again. Again the same thing
happened, the dead man re-appearing just as they were setting off in
their canoes from the camp that they were deserting on account of his
death. Finally the man died a third time. When he was buried this time
the men dug a very deep hole some distance from the camp, and then
hurried back to the camp and hastily gathered up their belongings and
left it. Nothing more was seen of the dead man, but when, after the
lapse of some months, they went to dig up the bones, they found the mat
and leaves and rope in which the corpse had been bound, but there were
no bones.

Amongst the coast-dwellers of the North Andaman I found a belief that
the soul of a dying man goes out with the ebbing tide.

There are, amongst the Andamanese, certain individuals who are
distinguished from their fellows by the supposed possession of
supernatural powers. These specially favoured persons correspond, to
some degree, with the medicine-men, magicians or shamans of other
primitive societies. The name for these medicine-men in the North
Andaman is oko-ǰumu, meaning literally “dreamer” or “one who speaks
from dreams” from a stem -ǰumu the primary meaning of which refers to
the phenomena of dreams. In Aka-Bea the corresponding term is
oko-paiad, and according to Mr Man, this term also means “dreamer.” Mr
Portman, however, gives taraba as the Aka-Bea word for “dream” or “to
dream.”

According to a statement by Mr Man, only men can possess the powers
that entitle them to be regarded as oko-paiad [91]. The natives whom I
questioned told me that a woman may possess the same powers, though it
is more usual for men to become famous in this way than women. There is
no very clear dividing line between those who are oko-ǰumu or oko-paiad
and those who are not; one person may possess the powers in only a
slight degree, so as scarcely to differentiate him from others, while
another may be much more highly gifted.

At the present time it is no longer possible to obtain full and
satisfactory information on this subject. Most of the old oko-ǰumu and
oko-paiad are now dead. Amongst the younger men there are a few who
pretend to the position, but the recent intercourse with foreigners has
produced a degree of scepticism in such matters that makes it difficult
or nearly impossible to obtain any reliable information as to the
former beliefs from any but the very old men. To this difficulty must
be added that in talking to some of the very few old men who could have
given more valuable information I had to make use of an interpreter,
and though they might have been willing to confide to me some of the
secrets of their profession they would not do so before a younger man
of their own race.

The powers of a dreamer, supernatural as they are, can only be acquired
by supernatural means, through contact in one way or another with the
spirits (i.e. the Lau or Čauga). One way of coming into contact with
the spirits is by death. If a man should, as the natives put it, die
and then come back to life again, he is, by that adventure, endowed
with the power that makes a medicine-man. One man of the Aka-Ko̱ra tribe
was pointed out to me as having obtained his powers in this way. It
would seem that during a serious illness he was unconscious for some
twelve hours or so, and his friends thought that he was dead. A
medicine-man whom I met with in the A-Pučikwar tribe was said to have
died and come to life again three times. Another man, whom I did not
meet, was described to me as a great oko-ǰumu, and from the description
given it seemed to me that he was subject to epileptic fits. As against
this, however, Mr Man states that “epilepsy is a recognised form of
malady, but the fits are not regarded in a superstitious light [92].”

Another way in which a man can acquire magical powers is by direct
communication with the spirits. A man who died a few years ago was
believed by the natives to have once met with some spirits in the
jungle, and to have acquired in this way the powers of an oko-ǰumu. He
used to go off into the jungle by himself at intervals and hold
communication with the spirits with whom he had made friends. From such
a visit he had returned with his head decorated with shredded palm-leaf
fibre (ko̱ro) which had, so he said, been placed on him by the spirits.
This man had a reputation as a powerful oko-ǰumu.

In a less degree the powers of an oko-ǰumu may be obtained through
dreams. It is believed that certain men have the power of communicating
with the spirits in dreams, and such men are oko-ǰumu. If a man or boy
experiences dreams that are in any way extraordinary, particularly if,
in his dreams he sees spirits, either the spirits of dead persons known
to him when alive, or spirits of the forest or the sea, he may acquire
in time the reputation of a medicine-man.

A man may claim some degree of magical power, and yet his claims may
not be recognized by others. Each oko-ǰumu has to make his own
reputation, and to sustain it when made. This he can only do by
demonstrating his power to others. Once this reputation is his, he not
only receives the respect of others but also makes a considerable
personal profit. Every one is anxious to be on good terms with one who
is believed to have extraordinary powers. Hence a man who is an
acknowledged oko-ǰumu is sure to receive a good share of the game
caught by others, and presents of all kinds from those who seek his
good-will.

As the name implies, and in whatever way his power may have been
obtained, an oko-ǰumu is privileged to dream in a way that less
favoured persons do not. In his dreams he can communicate with the
spirits of the dead. In dreams, also, so the natives say, he is able to
cause the illness of an enemy or to cure that of a friend.

By his communication with the spirits, in dreams, or in waking life,
the oko-ǰumu acquires magical knowledge that he is able to turn to
account in curing illness and in preventing bad weather. When a person
is ill the oko-ǰumu is often consulted as to the best means of treating
the patient. His treatment is often limited to the recommendation, or
the application, of some one or other of the recognized remedies. He
may undertake to dispel the spirits that are supposed to be the cause
of the disease, which he does by addressing them and conjuring them to
go away, or by the use of one or other of the substances and objects
that are believed to have the power of keeping spirits at a distance.
Sometimes the oko-ǰumu will promise to cure the patient by means of
dreams. It is believed that in his dreams he can communicate with the
spirits and can persuade them to help him to cure the sick person.

Besides their power of causing or curing sickness, the oko-ǰumu are
credited with being able to control the weather. As has been shown, the
Andamanese believe that the weather is under the control of two beings
named Biliku and Tarai. There is, however, an alternative and
contradictory belief, which is also held, that the weather is
controlled by the spirits, and particularly by those of the sea. The
means taken by magicians or others to prevent bad weather can be
divided into two kinds according as they are directed against Biliku or
Tarai, or against the spirits of the sea. As an example of the very
simple rites which are performed for this purpose, two cases may be
quoted. One of the oko-ǰumu of the Northern tribes, now dead, once
stopped a very violent storm by crushing between two stones a piece of
the Anadendron paniculatum and diving with it into the sea where he
placed it under a rock on the reef. A more recent example is very
similar. A man still living, named J̌ire Pilečar, who was, in a way, the
successor of the man formerly mentioned, is said to have stopped a
violent storm by using the leaves and bark of the Ficus laccifera in
the same way, that is by crushing them and placing them under a rock in
the sea. In both these cases it would seem that the rite was directed
not against Biliku and Tarai, but against the J̌urua.

Apart from his power to communicate directly with the spirits, the
oko-ǰumu owes his position to a superior knowledge of the magical
properties of common substances and objects. This knowledge he is
supposed to obtain from the spirits. However, a lesser degree of
knowledge on such matters is possessed by everybody. Thus in the
treatment of sickness there are a number of magical remedies of which
anyone can make use without consulting an oko-ǰumu.

A complete enumeration of all the things that are believed to possess
magical properties is, of course, not possible, but the following notes
refer to all the most important.

We may consider first of all the magical properties of mineral
substances. One of the most important of these is red ochre. Yellow
ochre, which is found in pockets in many parts of the islands, is
collected and burnt, when it turns red, and the powder so obtained is
either used by itself or is made into a paint with pig or turtle fat.
The powder is mixed with water and taken internally. Red paint is
applied to the throat and chest for coughs and colds and sore throats,
and round the ear for ear-ache. When a man feels unwell he often smears
red paint on his upper lip just below his nostrils. In this way, the
natives say, the “smell” of the paint cures his sickness. The paint is
sometimes used as a dressing for wounds or centipede bites. Its use for
ornamenting the body on ceremonial occasions has already been noted in
the last chapter.

In the North Andaman a soft red stone is found, called talar. This is
used as a substitute for red paint. It is rubbed on the body, or it is
powdered and the powder is mixed with water and taken internally.

White clay (to̱l-odu in Aka-J̌eru) is sometimes used medicinally, both
externally and internally. The commoner clay (odu in Aka-J̌eru) is
plastered on sores, and has the effect of keeping off flies, if it does
nothing else.

An olive-coloured earth (called čulŋa in Aka-Bea), found in certain
springs, is prized as a remedy. It is mixed with water and taken
internally as a general remedy for all sorts of complaints.

Turning now to the magical properties of vegetable substances, there
are a large number of these, and some of them have not been botanically
identified.

The Anadendron paniculatum is a plant from which the Andamanese obtain
a valuable fibre, which they use for their bow-strings, and for thread
with which to make their arrows and harpoons. A number of magical
properties are attributed to this plant. Rheumatism is supposed to be
due to the “smell” of the plant getting into the system when the fibre
is being prepared [93]. The “smell” of the green plant, or of the fibre
until it has been thoroughly dried for some days, is believed to
frighten away turtle. A man who has been preparing the fibre would not
dream of joining a turtle-hunting expedition, for his presence in the
canoe would be sufficient to drive away all the turtle. A
turtle-hunting expedition would be a failure if a piece of the green
creeper were in the canoe. A man who has been handling the plant may
not cook turtle, for the meat would be “bad,” i.e., uneatable. The same
thing would happen if turtle meat accidentally came in contact with a
piece of the plant. All this applies only to the green creeper, and not
to the fibre after it has been properly prepared and dried. The fibre
itself is used for binding the heads of turtle-harpoons, so it is
evidently regarded as harmless.

If a piece of the Anadendron creeper were burnt in the fire the natives
believe that it would drive all the turtle away from the neighbourhood,
or, according to another statement, that there would be a great storm.

So far we have considered the properties of the plant only in so far as
they make it dangerous to handle. It has other and beneficial
properties. It is said that a man swimming in waters infested with
sharks would be safe from them if he had a piece of the Anadendron
creeper with him, in his belt or necklace. The creeper is also supposed
to preserve anyone who carries it from the attacks of the sea spirits
(J̌urua).

The Hibiscus tiliaceus is a small tree from which the natives obtain
the fibre which they make into rope, used now for harpoon lines and in
former times for turtle-nets. The leaves of this tree are believed to
have the power of keeping away the spirits of the sea. They have no
efficacy, however, against the spirits of the forest. Leaves of the
Hibiscus tiliaceus are used in the turtle-eating ceremony described in
the last chapter. For cooking turtle the only wood that may be used is
the Hibiscus. If any other wood were used the meat would not be good.
In this connection it is necessary to point out an error in the
statements of Mr Man. He says that the wood of the alaba must never be
used for cooking turtle, though it may be used for cooking pig, and
that Puluga is angry if this commandment is not observed and sends
either the sun or moon to punish the offender [94]. There is evidently
an error here. The alaba is the Hibiscus tiliaceus. Mr Man identifies
it with the Melochia velutina, but this is an error. Now the custom in
connection with the Hibiscus (alaba) is not that it may not be used for
cooking turtle, but that no other kind of wood must be used. It is
difficult to see how Mr Man fell into the error, unless he mistook a
statement regarding the yo̱lba (Anadendron paniculatum) for a statement
relating to alaba (Hibiscus tiliaceus). We have just seen that if the
Anadendron comes in contact with turtle meat the meat will be bad, and
that if it is burnt there will be a storm.

Another plant that provides fibre for thread is the Gnetum edule. There
is a belief that the green creeper of this plant will drive away
turtle, if a piece of it be taken in a canoe.

Magical properties are attributed to the Ficus laccifera tree. These
trees are believed to be the home of the yet unborn souls of children.
I was told in the North Andaman that if a tree of the species were cut
there would be a storm. The bark of the aerial roots of the tree
affords a fibre used in the Little Andaman for bow-strings, but only
used in the Great Andaman for making personal ornaments. It is possible
that some magical properties are attributed to the ornaments made from
this fibre.

The Pterocarpus dalbergioides is one of the most striking trees of the
Andamans. It has a very hard red wood, from which the natives make
their sounding-boards. There is an obscure belief in the A-Pučikwar
tribe (and possibly also in other tribes) that it is dangerous to look
at the tree when it is in flower. I was twice told a story of how some
people were affected by looking at the flowers, and either went mad or
died. On one occasion my interpreter translated the words of my
informant by saying “They saw the flowers, and went giddy, and they all
went to hell (J̌ereg-l’ar-mugu).” Men must be careful when the tree is
in flower, not to look at it too long. In the North Andaman I was told
that string games (ǰipre) must not be played when the Pterocarpus tree
is in flower. They may be indulged in with safety at any other time of
the year. (String games, according to one statement, were invented by
the Lau, while another account attributes the invention to the crab.)

The Tetranthera lancæfolia is a small tree from which the natives
obtain the wood for the shafts of their pig arrows. The leaves of this
tree are believed to have the power to keep away the spirits of the
forest. They are used in the pig-eating ceremony described in the last
chapter. The wood is shredded and made into plumes, and these plumes
are believed to have magical properties. They are worn by a man who has
killed another, and are believed to protect him from the vengeance of
the spirit of the dead man.

A common remedy for sickness of different kinds is a small tree called
gugma in Aka-Bea, which Mr Man identifies as being Trigonostemon
longifolius. The leaves of this tree are made into a bed for the
patient to lie upon. They are also crushed and rubbed over the
patient’s body, or he is made to inhale the odour of the crushed
leaves. The natives say that it is the “smell” of the plant that
possesses medical properties. The “smell” will drive away turtle, and
leaves should therefore not be taken in a canoe. A man who has been
handling the leaves would not go turtle-hunting.

Another remedy is a species of Alpinia. The leaves and stems of this
plant are chewed and the juice swallowed for certain ailments. The
plant is also used when taking honey. A man takes some of the leaves in
his mouth and chews them well. Before taking the honeycomb he sprays
the saliva from his mouth over and around it. He may also rub the
chewed leaves over his body. The natives say that in this way they are
able to prevent the bees from stinging them.

Magical properties are attributed to a number of plants that have not
been botanically identified. Thus the leaves of a small tree called
tare in Aka-J̌eru are crushed and moistened with water and rubbed over
the body as a remedy for illness. A strip of bark from the same tree is
tied round the chest of a man with a pain in his chest. The bark of two
trees called (in Aka-J̌eru) tip and laro is crushed and moistened and
rubbed over a sick man’s body. The leaves of a plant called pare are
crushed with water and the infusion is drunk by persons suffering from
diarrhœa and abdominal pains. A creeper called korotli is crushed and
tied round a limb in cases of snake-bite. The seeds of the Entada
scandens are heated in the fire and applied (while hot) to such wounds
as that from the tusk of a boar.

There are a certain number of trees and plants about which the natives
say that any person cutting them will become blind. The names of four
of these in Aka-J̌eru are ǰin, burut, deŋ, and mit.

We may turn now to animals and animal substances. Magical properties
are attributed to bees’-wax, particularly to black bees’-wax. In a case
of pleurisy black bees’-wax was heated until it was soft, and then
smeared over the man’s chest. Bees’-wax is believed to keep away the
spirits of the forest.

If a man be bitten by a snake and the snake be killed it is skinned and
the inner surface of the skin is applied to the wound.

A hiccough is supposed to be the result of inadvertently swallowing a
tree lizard, whose call rather resembles the sound of a person
hiccoughing.

The condition popularly called “pins and needles” or described as an
arm or leg “going to sleep” is believed by the Andamanese to be due to
the bite of a rat. If a man wakes up in the night with one of his limbs
benumbed in this way, he believes that a rat has bitten him while he
slept.

The Andamanese say that the bite of a civet-cat (Paradoxurus) will
produce cramp. I was once told that if a man eats the flesh of the
civet-cat and then goes into the water he will become “lame.” This
means, I think, that he will have cramp, and so will be unable to swim.

The flesh and particularly the fat of the flying fox (Pteropus) is
believed to be a remedy for rheumatism. An old man who was suffering
from this ailment once asked me to shoot for him some of these bats,
which he cooked and ate.

If turtle-fat be permitted to burn in the fire there will be a storm.

Mention has already been made of the magical value attributed to human
bones. They are esteemed as a means of driving away spirits, and
therefore of curing or preventing sickness. A human jaw-bone was
hanging in my hut in such a position that it could swing in the wind.
The natives attributed to this the illness from which I and several of
them were suffering at the time, and asked me to put the bone away in a
basket, where it could not move.

Bones of animals are made into ornaments in the same way as human
bones, and magical properties of a similar kind seem to be attributed
to them.

Of other objects possessing magical properties the most important is
fire. Fire is believed to have the power of keeping away spirits of the
sea and of the forest. A fire is always kept alight beside a sick man
or woman. For dysentery stones are heated in a fire and the patient is
required to defecate on to these.

In conclusion, mention must be made of one favourite remedy of the
Andamanese, namely scarification. The part of the body that is the seat
of pain is scarified, as the forehead for headaches, the cheek for
toothache. A number of very small incisions are made in the skin close
together, with a sharp flake of quartz or glass. The incisions are just
deep enough to cut through the skin and cause a little blood to ooze
out, but not so deep as to produce a flow of blood. The operation is
the work of women. It is probably more frequently used than any other
remedy except red paint and human bones.








CHAPTER IV

MYTHS AND LEGENDS


The Andamanese have a number of stories which are told to the younger
people by their elders and relate to the doings of their ancestors in a
time long ago. Some of these stories are recorded in the present
chapter. A difficulty in the way of giving any clear and readable
account of them is the fact that there are many slightly different
versions of one and the same legend. To some extent the variations are
local, each tribe, and even each portion of a tribe having its own set
of legendary stories. Besides these local variations there are also
individual variations. Two men of the same tribe may relate what is
substantially the same story, yet each chooses his own words and
gestures, and to some extent they may even arrange the incidents
differently.

In the last chapter it was mentioned that there are certain
individuals, known as oko-ǰumu in the North Andaman and oko-paiad in
the South, who are believed to have special knowledge as to the spirits
and as to the magical efficacy of remedies for sickness. It is these
oko-ǰumu also who are the authorities on the legendary lore of the
Andamanese. In the case of magical remedies there is a certain common
stock of beliefs as to the efficacy to be attributed to different
substances, such as leaves of different plants, and on the basis of
these beliefs the oko-ǰumu elaborates the remedies that he uses in
particular cases. Each oko-ǰumu, however, prides himself on being, to
some extent, original. An example of this has been already mentioned.
When a great storm arose an oko-ǰumu of one of the Northern tribes
succeeded in stopping it (in the belief of the natives) by placing a
piece of the crushed stem of the Anadendron creeper under a particular
stone in the sea. On a later occasion another storm arose, and the
successor of the first-mentioned oko-ǰumu was appealed to that he might
exert his powers. He did not simply imitate his predecessor, but he
placed a piece of crushed bark and twigs of the Ficus laccifera in the
sea under a different stone. In very much the same way there is a
common stock of beliefs as to the events that took place in the time of
the ancestors, but each oko-ǰumu builds up on this basis his own
particular set of legends, so that it is rarely that two of them tell
the same story in the same way. An oko-ǰumu may obtain for himself a
reputation by relating legends of the ancestors in a vivid and amusing
way. Such a man would be able to invent new stories by combining
together in his own way some of the traditional incidents. The desire
on the part of each oko-ǰumu to be original and so to enhance his own
reputation is a fertile source of variation in the legends.

This lack of traditional form, which is a very important characteristic
of the Andamanese mythology, may be compared with their lack of
traditional songs. Just as every man composes his own songs, so, within
certain limits, every oko-ǰumu relates in his own way the legends of
his tribe. But whereas every man is a composer of songs, only a certain
number are regarded as having authority to speak on the legends.

Underlying the legends of any tribe there are a certain number of
beliefs or representations with which every native is familiar. It is
on the basis of these that the oko-ǰumu elaborates his own doctrine, if
we may call it so, which he hands on to his followers, who in turn may
become oko-ǰumu and produce further slight modifications of their own.
Thus the legends are continually being changed, though in any one
generation the changes introduced are slight, and it would take a long
time for important changes in belief to be brought about. There is
evidence, however, that a succession of leading men in the A-Pučikwar
tribe have succeeded in introducing a new doctrine as to the weather,
making Bilik the name of a class of beings instead of the name of a
single being, and that this doctrine, while it has not entirely ousted
the former beliefs, has yet succeeded in gaining currency not only in
the A-Pučikwar tribe, but also in the Aka-Ko̱l and O̱ko̱-J̌uwo̱i tribes.

At the present time it is only possible to recover a small part of the
many different legends with their variants. The introduction of many
new interests into the lives of the natives, through the European
settlement and the many changes it has produced, has caused the ancient
legends to be neglected. Most of the old oko-ǰumu have died without
leaving any followers to take their place. Many of the legends recorded
here are merely what some of the men not specially skilled in legendary
lore can remember of the stories told them in former days by oko-ǰumu
who are now dead.

One feature of the legends that must be pointed out is their
unsystematic nature. The same informant may give, on different
occasions, two entirely different versions of such a thing as the
origin of fire, or the beginning of the human race. The Andamanese, to
all appearance, regard each little story as independent, and do not
consciously compare one with another. They thus seem to be entirely
unconscious of what are obvious contradictions to the student of the
legends. It is necessary to emphasise the fragmentary and unsystematic
nature of the Andaman mythology because Mr Man, in his work on the
Andamanese, has brought together a number of legends from the tribes of
the South Andaman and has combined them into a continuous and fairly
consistent narrative, and has thus, undoubtedly not intentionally,
given a wrong impression to the reader of what the nature of the
disconnected stories really is. While each of the stories included in
Mr Man’s account is derived directly from the natives, it would seem
certain that the arrangement of them into a more or less consistent
narrative is due to Mr Man.

In recording the legends in this chapter, only the English translation
is given. In some cases the legends were translated on the spot and
written down in English. In other cases they were written down in the
native language and then translated. When I was recording the legends I
very frequently had to ask what was meant by a particular statement,
the meaning of which might be quite clear to a native, but which was
obscure to one not accustomed to thinking in the same way as the
natives. In some cases I could obtain no satisfactory explanation, and
such legends are given in this chapter in as nearly as possible an
exact literal translation of the original. In other cases the
explanations given by the natives have been incorporated in the
translation itself.

In order to give the reader a fair idea of the nature of the legends as
they are told, one is here given in the native language (Aka-Čari) with
a word-for-word translation.


    A Maia Dik iǰokoduko; o ko̱nmo teč inǰukte̱rto̱ia;
    Sir Prawn makes fire;    yam leaf catches fire;

    ko̱nmo teč bi ikterbie;    kete uiǰoko;      uiǰokobiko;
       yam leaf is dry;     that one it burns; he makes a fire;

    Maia Dik ubenoba;  Maia Totemo emato;       uǰokil uektebalo;
    Sir Prawn slept;  Sir Kingfisher takes; he fire with he runs away

       Maia Totemo ǰokobiko;         Maia Totemo taǰeo ubiko;
    Sir Kingfisher makes a fire; Sir Kingfisher fish (food) cooks;

         upetil ubeno;      Maia Mite ǰuktebalo uemato.
    his belly in he sleeps; Sir Dove runs away taking.


The above translation is hardly comprehensible without a little
explanation. The word iǰoko means “something burns,” the word ubiko
means “he cooks (by roasting).” The compound iǰokobiko may mean either
“he makes a fire and cooks something at it” or it may simply mean “he
makes up a fire (by adding firewood).” The word iǰokoduko has a quite
different meaning, “to produce fire.” The derivation of inǰukte̱rto̱ia is
uncertain, as I am not sure of the proper use of er-to̱ia; it is
translated on the basis of the explanation given me by the man who told
the story. The word ikterbie is descriptive of the dryness of dead
leaves.

A free translation would be as follows: “It was Sir Prawn who first
produced or obtained fire. Some yam leaves, being shrivelled and dry by
reason of the hot weather, caught fire and burnt. The prawn made a fire
with some firewood and went to sleep. The kingfisher stole fire and ran
away with it. He made a fire and cooked some fish. When he had filled
his belly he went to sleep. The dove stole fire from the kingfisher and
ran away.” It is implied that it was the dove who gave the fire to the
ancestors of the Andamanese.

Versions of legends of the origin of fire are given by Mr Portman, in
each of the languages of the Southern group of tribes. [95]

All the legends relate to events that are supposed to have happened in
the past, and deal with the doings of the ancestors of the Andamanese.
In the North Andaman the ancestors are sometimes called Lau t’er-kuro,
i.e. the big spirits, “big” being used in the sense of our word
“chief.” Another term for them is N’a-mai-koloko, from n’ or nio =
they, aka-mai = father, and koloko = people, so that the phrase
literally means “the father people,” or the ancestors. In the South
Andaman the ancestors are sometimes called Čauga tabaŋa, which is the
equivalent of Lau t’er-kuro. Mr Man seems to have misunderstood the
exact meaning of this term. He writes: “Lači Lora-lola, the chief of
the survivors from the Deluge [96], gave, at his death, the name of
Čauga tabaŋa to their descendants.... The Čauga tabaŋa are described as
fine tall men with large beards, and they are said to have been long
lived, but, in other respects and in their mode of living they did not
differ from the present inhabitants. The name seems to have been borne
till comparatively recent times, as a few still living are said to
remember having seen the last of the so-called Čauga tabaŋa [97].”

Mr Man has evidently not realised that the term čauga cannot be applied
to any living Andamanese, but may be applied to every dead one. The
Čauga are the spirits of dead natives, and new Čauga are continually
coming into existence by death. Any person who is of such importance
when alive as to form the subject of legends or stories after his death
may be distinguished (after his death only) as a Čauga tabaŋa. The name
may thus be applied to the purely mythical ancestors of the legends,
and also to the spirits of men recently dead whose memory is preserved
owing to fame acquired in some way when they were alive. It is thus
possible that some of the natives with whom Mr Man formerly conversed
are now Čauga tabaŋa, i.e. big spirits, having been “big men” when they
were alive.

Another name sometimes used in the South Andaman to denote the
ancestors is Tomo-la [98]. This word, however, is sometimes used in the
singular to denote the mythical first man. Its use is thus similar to
that of the name Bilik in the A-Pučikwar tribe, which is used both as
the name of a single mythical being and also as the name of a class of
beings. Only the early ancestors of the Andamanese, i.e. those about
whom the legends are related, can be called Tomo-la.

Among the ancestors who appear in the legends there are a few who bear
names that are used as personal names of men and women at the present
time, and who appear in the legends simply as men and women. The larger
number of the ancestors, however, bear names that are those of species
of animals. In each case the ancestor is identified with the species
which bears the same name. Yet others of the mythical ancestors have
names that are neither personal names at the present day, nor names of
animals. It may perhaps be supposed that in all such cases the name has
some sort of meaning, but in many instances it was not found possible
to discover the meaning with certainty.

When speaking of the ancestors, the natives generally add to the name
the appropriate title. These titles are, in the North Andaman Maia
(Sir) and Mimi (Lady), in Akar-Bale Da (Sir) and In (Lady), and in
Aka-Bea Maia and Čana.

There are legends as to the origin of mankind, i.e., of their own race,
for they did not recognize, until recently, the existence of any men of
other races than their own, calling aliens Lau (spirits). There is,
however, no unanimity in their beliefs as to how mankind originated,
even in any one tribe. An Aka-Bo legend is as follows:

“The first man was J̌utpu [99]. He was born inside the joint of a big
bamboo, just like a bird in an egg [100]. The bamboo split and he came
out. He was a little child. When it rained he made a small hut for
himself and lived in it. He made little bows and arrows. As he grew
bigger he made bigger huts, and bigger bows and arrows. One day he
found a lump of quartz and with it he scarified himself. J̌utpu was
lonely, living all by himself. He took some clay (ko̱t) from a nest of
the white ants and moulded it into the shape of a woman. She became
alive and became his wife. She was called Ko̱t. They lived together at
Teraut-buliu. Afterwards J̌utpu made other people out of clay. These
were the ancestors. J̌utpu taught them how to make canoes and bows and
arrows, and how to hunt and fish. His wife taught the women how to make
baskets and nets and mats and belts, and how to use clay for making
patterns on the body.”

The same story was told me by Aka-J̌eru men, the only difference being
that they gave the name of the place where J̌utpu lived differently,
mentioning a spot in the Aka-J̌eru country.

From the Aka-J̌eru I also obtained what is really another version of the
same legend, though the name of the first ancestor is given
differently. “The first man came out of the buttress of a po̱ičo
(Sterculia) tree, and was called Po̱ičotobut (Sterculia buttress). He
had no wife, so he cohabited with an ant’s nest (ko̱t) and thus obtained
a large number of children. These were the first Andamanese, and
Po̱ičotobut taught them all their arts and customs. Po̱ičotobut lived at
Bo̱ro̱ŋ Buliu (in Aka-J̌eru country).”

The association between the origin of the Andamanese and an ant’s nest
(ko̱t) is retained in another legend, told by an Aka-J̌eru man. “Tarai
(the south-west monsoon) was the first man. His wife was Ko̱t. They
lived at Tarai-era-poŋ [101]. Their children were Tau (the sky), Bo̱to
(wind), Piribi (storm), and Air (the foam on a rough sea).”

An entirely different legend, of which, however, I could not obtain a
detailed version, is also found in the Aka-J̌eru tribe. This is to the
effect that the first living being was Maia Čara [102]. He made the
earth, and caused it to be peopled with inhabitants. He also made the
sun and moon. In the last chapter Čara was mentioned as a mythical
being associated with the sun, with daylight and with fine weather. One
of my informants of the Aka-J̌eru tribe said that Čara had a wife named
Nimi (a common personal name), and that his children were Čeo (knife),
Ino (water), Loto, and Luk. It is Maia Čara, according to one commonly
received account, who makes the daylight every day.

I could not obtain any Aka-Kede legend as to the origin of mankind. One
informant of that tribe said that it was Bilika (the north-east
monsoon) who made the world and the first men and women, but he could
give me no detailed legend.

In the Aka-Ko̱l and A-Pučikwar tribes there are several versions of a
legend that makes the monitor lizard (Varanus salvator) the progenitor
of the Andaman race. In all the versions there is no mention of how the
lizard himself originated. The following was told me by an Aka-Ko̱l man.
“When Ta Pe̱tie (Sir Monitor Lizard) was aka-go̱i (i.e. unmarried, but
having completed the initiation ceremonies), he went into the jungle to
hunt pig. He climbed up a Dipterocarpus tree, and got stuck there
[103]. Beyan (civet-cat, Paradoxurus) found him there, stuck in the
tree. She released him and helped him to get down. The two got married.
Their children were the Tomo-la (i.e. the ancestors).”

Another legend telling how the monitor lizard obtained a wife was
related to me on more than one occasion by A-Pučikwar men. “The first
of the ancestors (Tomo-la) was Ta Pe̱tie (Sir Monitor Lizard). He lived
at Tomo-la-tog. At first he had no wife. One day, when he was out
fishing, he found a piece of black wood of the kind called ko̱lotat
(Diospyros sp.). He found it in the creek, and brought it to his hut,
where he put it on the little platform over the fire [104]. He sat down
by the fire and set to work over an arrow that he was making. As he
bent over his work he did not see what was happening. By and by he
heard some one laugh, and looked up. Then he saw that the piece of wood
had turned into a woman. He got up and took her down from the platform.
She sat down with him and became his wife. They had a son named Po̱i (a
species of small bird, possibly a woodpecker), and afterwards many
other children. They lived together for a long time at Tomo-la-tog. One
day Ta Pe̱tie went fishing and was drowned in the creek. He turned into
a kara-duku.”

There is some doubt about the translation of the word kara-duku. It is
an Aka-Bea word, although it was used as given above, by an A-Pučikwar
man. Mr Man translates it “cachalot.” Mr Portman says that kara-duku is
“crocodile,” but that the cachalot, the proper name of which is
biriga-ta, is also sometimes called kara-duku [105]. The only authority
for the existence of crocodiles in the Andamans is the statement of Mr
Portman, who says that the natives killed one in the Middle Andaman and
brought the bones to him. Although I was in many of the creeks of the
Andamans at different times I never saw a crocodile, and none of the
other officers of the Settlement, who have repeatedly explored a large
part of the islands, ever seems to have seen one, so that the one
recorded by Mr Portman may possibly have been a single one that had
come oversea from the mainland of Asia.

Another A-Pučikrwa account of the origin of the first woman Ko̱lotat, is
as follows: “At first there were no women, only men. A man called
Ko̱lotat came to live in the A-Pučikwar country. Ta Pe̱tie (Sir Monitor
Lizard) caught him and cut off his genitals and made him into a woman.
She became his wife. Their children were the first of the ancestors
(Tomo-la).”

Another account given by members of the A-Pučikwar tribe is that the
first man was Tomo, or Tomo-la. One version that I heard is that Tomo
made the world and peopled it with the ancestors. He made the moon
(Puki) who is his wife. Tomo and his wife invented all the arts of the
Andamanese and taught them to the ancestors. After his death Tomo went
to live in the sky, where he now is. It is Tomo who sends the fine
weather, while Bilik sends the bad weather. In the world where Tomo now
lives it is always daylight and is always fine. When men die their
spirits go up to the sky and live with Tomo. The man who gave me this
version said that he did not know how Tomo originated, but was quite
sure that he was not made by Bilik. Tomo came first and Bilik came
afterwards. The Andamanese are all the children of Tomo [106].

In disagreement with this story, another man of the same tribe said
that Tomo was made by Bilik. He (i.e., Tomo) had a wife Mita (Dove),
and they were the ancestors of the Andamanese. Yet another informant
said: “Ta Tomo was the first man. He made bows and arrows and canoes.
His canoes were made of the wood of the Pandanus tree. Mita (Dove) was
his wife. It was she who first made nets and baskets and discovered the
uses of red paint and white clay.” When I asked how Tomo and his wife
originated my informant replied that he did not know.

A species of bird (perhaps a woodpecker), called Po̱i in A-Pučikwar and
Ko̱io in Aka-Ko̱l, is often said to have been the son of Tomo. I was once
told that Ko̱io was the first of the Andamanese, from whom they are all
descended, and that his wife was Mita. Another informant said that
Pe̱tie (Monitor Lizard) was the first man and Mita was his wife, while
still another stated that Ta Mita (Sir Dove) was the progenitor of the
race, making the dove male instead of female. These different versions
will give some idea of the contradictory nature of the statements of
the Andamanese. All of them come from only two tribes, the A-Pučikwar
and the Aka-Ko̱l.

From the Akar-Bale tribe I obtained the following legend. “Puluga made
the first of the ancestors. He made one man and one woman called Nyali
and Irap [107]. He gave them fire, and taught them how to hunt and
fish, and how to make bows and arrows and baskets and nets. The place
where they lived is called Irap because they lived there [108].”

Another Akar-Bale version is that the first man was Da Duku (Sir
Monitor Lizard), and that his wife was In Bain (Lady Civet-cat).

Mr E. H. Man, in his account of the South Andaman, says that there are
a few discrepancies in their accounts of the creation and origin of the
human species, but in the main features all the natives with whom he
spoke are agreed. The world was created by Puluga, who then made a man
named Tomo, the first of the human race. Tomo was black, like the
present Andamanese, but was much taller and bearded. Puluga showed him
the various fruit-trees in the jungle, which then existed only at
Wota-emi, a spot in the country of the A-Pučikwar tribe. The wife of
Tomo was Čana Elewadi (Lady Crab), and as to her origin there are
different legends. According to some, Puluga created her after he had
taught Tomo how to sustain life; others say that Tomo saw her swimming
near his home and called to her, whereupon she landed and lived with
him; while a third story represents her as coming pregnant to Kyd
Island, where she gave birth to several male and female children, who
subsequently became the progenitors of the present race. Tomo had two
sons and two daughters by Čana Elewadi; the names of the former were
Biro-la and Bo̱ro-la, and of the latter Rie-la and Čo̱rmi-la.

A story that tells how Tomo came to his end states that one day, while
hunting, he fell into the creek called Yara-tig-ǰig and was drowned. He
was at once transformed into a kara-duku (which Mr Man translates as
“cachalot”). Čana Elewadi, ignorant of the accident that had befallen
her husband, went in a canoe with some of her grandchildren to
ascertain the cause of his continued absence; on seeing them, Kara-duku
upset their skiff and drowned his wife and most of her companions. She
became a small crab, of a description still named after her, elewadi,
and the others were transformed into lizards (duku). Another version of
this story is that, wearied with an unsuccessful day’s hunting, Tomo
went to the shore, where he found a čidi (Pinna) shell-fish; while
playing with it, it fastened on him, and he was unable to free himself
until a baian (Paradoxurus) seized the čidi and liberated him at the
expense of one of his members. Shortly after this he saw his wife and
some of their children coming after him in a canoe; unwilling that they
should become aware of the misfortune that had befallen him he upset
the canoe, drowning its occupants and himself. He then became
kara-duku, and the others duku, which are now plentiful in the jungles
[109].

In some of the preceding legends reference is made to Biliku or Puluga.
There is a very general belief, in all parts of the islands, that in
the time of the ancestors, Biliku or Puluga lived on earth. Each tribe
has at least one spot in its territory that is pointed out as the place
where Biliku (or Puluga) lived. In some tribes there are three or four
such places, each of which is claimed as the original home of Biliku by
the people living in the neighbourhood. In many cases the name of the
spot contains a reference to the legend, as Puluga l’od-baraiǰ (the
village of Puluga) in Akar-Bale or Biliku era-poŋ (the cave of Biliku)
in the North Andaman.

I was able to obtain a few legends relating to the time when Biliku
lived on earth, though there were probably many more that I was not
fortunate enough to hear.

The following is an Aka-J̌eru legend:

“In the time of the ancestors Biliku lived at Ar-ko̱l. One day the
people caught a turtle and brought it to the camp. Biliku was sitting
there. They asked her if she would eat some of it. She said ‘No.’ They
put the meat in the roof of the hut and went away. When they had gone
Biliku ate the whole turtle. Then she went to sleep. The people came
back and found the turtle gone. They said ‘Biliku has eaten it.’ They
left the camp and all went to Tebi-čiro. They left Biliku asleep. Some
of the people went to hunt for turtle. Their canoe passed near Ar-ko̱l.
Biliku saw the people in the canoe. She called to them and asked to be
taken with them. The people refused saying ‘You ate up all the turtle.’
Biliku had a round stone and several be shells (pearl shells). She
threw the shells at the people in the canoe. The first shell did not
hit them but came back and fell at her feet; and so also with the
second. Then Biliku got very angry and threw a third time. The shell
struck the canoe and killed all the people in it. The canoe and its
occupants became a reef of rocks that is still there. The other people
at Tebi-čiro called across to Biliku saying ‘Come over here.’ She
answered ‘Very well! I am coming.’ She took the stone that she had and
put it in the sea, and it floated. She got on to it to cross over. When
she had got half way across Biliku and her stone sank in the sea. They
became two big rocks that are there still.” This legend refers to the
west coast of the North Andaman. The pearl shells that Biliku throws
seem to be lightning, and the round stone the one that she rolls about
to make thunder.

A few other statements about Biliku and Tarai from the four tribes of
the North Andaman are given below just as they were taken down in my
note-books.

(1) “Biliku lived at Pura-’ra-poŋ in the time of the ancestors. Her
husband was Pe̱rǰido and her children Totaimo, Mite (cicada) and Tarai.
She made the sun and the moon. It was she who first invented all the
things that are now made and used by women, such as baskets, nets,
etc., and it was she who discovered fire, and who first discovered the
use of edible roots such as ko̱nmo and mino (two species of Dioscorea).”

(2) “Biliku used to live at Čaura. She had a husband Tarai and a son
Pe̱rǰido, and a daughter Mite. She used to live only on certain
vegetable foods, lo̱ito, pata, bui, čo, ko̱nmo and mino and others. It
was Biliku who made the earth (the forest, ti-miku). She began at
Čaura.”

(3) “Biliku lived at Ar-Ko̱l in the time of the ancestors. Her husband
was Tarai and their children were the birds, To̱ro̱i, Taka, Čoto̱t,
Poruatoko, Kelil, Mite, Čo̱pčura, Benye, Biratkoro, Čereo, Milidu,
Bobelo, Ko̱lo, and Teo.” (Aka-J̌eru.)

(4) “Biliku lived at Poroket. She was unmarried. She had a son Pe̱rǰido,
and her other children were To̱ro̱i, Čelene, Čoto̱t and Čerei. (These four
are the names of birds.) It was Pe̱rǰido who invented all the arts of
the Andamanese such as their bows and arrows, etc.” (Aka-Bo?)

(5) “Biliku used to live at Peč-meo with her husband To̱ro̱i (a bird).
She used to eat lo̱ito, and when anyone else ate that root she was
angry. Tarai lived at Čaroŋa with his wife Kelil (a bird). He ate only
mikulu.” (Aka-Ko̱ra.)

(6) “Tarai has very long legs and a short body. He used to live on a
small island beyond Interview Island, which is now submerged. When
Tarai goes to sleep he breathes very heavily and this makes the wind.”

The next is an Aka-Kede legend. “In the days of the ancestors Bilika
lived at Purum-at-čape in the Aka-Kede country, with her husband
Po̱ro̱kul. One day Po̱ro̱kul was out hunting. He returned with a pig that
he had killed and came to the creek on the other side of which was his
home (Co̱ti-te̱r-buli Buliu). Laden as he was with the pig he could not
swim across the creek. Bilika was sleeping, but her children were
playing near and saw their father on the other side of the creek. They
ran and told their mother that their father was coming but could not
cross the creek. Bilika went and lay down on one bank of the creek and
stretched out her leg so that it reached the other bank. Po̱ro̱kul walked
across her leg and so reached home.”

While it is clear from this legend that Bilika was of super-human size,
the same was also true of her husband, if we may judge from another
legend. “Po̱ro̱kul made for himself a bow (of the large southern
pattern), with which to shoot pig. At this time the sky was low down
near the earth, only just above the tops of the trees. When Po̱ro̱kul had
finished his bow he lifted it upright. The top of it struck the sky and
lifted it up to its present position where it has remained ever since.”

In another legend from another part of the Aka-Kede tribe Bilika is
spoken of as being male. “Bilika lived at Po̱ro̱ŋ-et-čo with his wife
Mite. They had a child. The ancestors ate Bilika’s food, lo̱ito and kata
and other plants. Bilika was very angry. He used to smell their mouths
to see if they had eaten his food. When he found a man or woman who had
done so he would cut his throat. The ancestors were very angry with
Bilika, because he killed the men and women when they ate his foods.
They all came together and killed Bilika and his wife Mite. Maia Burto
(a species of fish) took the child (of Bilika) away to the north-east.”

Owing to my lack of knowledge of the Aka-Kede language there are some
points of the above legend that remain obscure. I think that the child
of Bilika is also named Bilika, and that it is he (or she) who now
lives in the north-east and sends the storms. The plants (lo̱ito, kata,
etc.), called here the “food” of Bilika, are those mentioned in the
last chapter as specially belonging to Bilika, who is angry when the
natives eat them. As regards the name, Mite, of Bilika’s wife, I do not
know whether this is the name of the bronze-winged dove, or of the
cicada. In some of the Andamanese languages the names of these two are
very similar, the only difference being a very slight one in the way of
pronouncing the two vowels.

The A-Pučikwar people who live on the east coast of Baratang Island say
that in the beginning the ancestors lived at a place called Wota-emi,
and Bilik lived opposite to them across the strait at a place called
To̱l-l’oko-tima. In a rock at Wota-emi there is a large peculiarly
shaped hollow. This is said to be where Bilik used to sit when he was
on earth.

An Akar-Bale legend is as follows. “In the days of the ancestors Puluga
lived at J̌ila off the east coast of Henry Lawrence Island and the
ancestors lived at Puluga l’od-baraiǰ (the village of Puluga) on the
main island just opposite to J̌ila. Puluga was always getting angry with
the ancestors, because they dug up yams and ate čakan (Entada scandens)
and barata (Caryota sobolifera). When he was angry he used to destroy
their huts and property. So the people sent him out of the world,
saying ‘We do not want you here. You are always angry with us.’ Puluga
went away to the north-east.”

It is worth while to note that J̌ila is north-east from Puluga
l’od-baraiǰ, just as To̱l-l’oko-tima is north-east from Wota-emi. In
both cases there is a narrow strait between the place where the
ancestors lived and the home of Puluga or Bilik.

There are a number of different legends that relate how the ancestors
first obtained fire [110]. In many of these legends there is a
reference to Biliku or Puluga. A common statement in the North Andaman
is that “Fire was stolen from Biliku by Maia Tiritmo (Sir Kingfisher).”
Some of the legends give further details. An Aka-Čari legend is as
follows:

“Biliku had a red stone and a pearl shell (be). She struck them
together and obtained fire. She collected firewood and made a fire. She
went to sleep. Mite (the bronze-winged dove) came and stole fire. He
made a fire for himself. He gave fire to all the people in the village.
Afterwards fire was given to all the places. Each village had its own.”

The next is an Aka-J̌eru version.

“In the days of the ancestors they had no fire. Biliku had fire. While
Biliku slept Maia Lirčitmo (Sir Kingfisher) came and stole fire. As he
was taking the fire Biliku awoke and saw him. Lirčitmo swallowed the
fire. Biliku took a pearl shell (be) and threw it at Lirčitmo and cut
off his head. The fire came out (of his neck). The ancestors got the
fire. Lirčitmo became a bird.”

The next is also, I believe, an Aka-J̌eru story. “Maia Tiritmo (Sir
Kingfisher) lived at Tolepar Buruin. He had no fire. When he caught
fish he had no fire with which to cook it. He went to the place where
Čo̱kčura (heron) lived. There was no fire there. Tiritmo took some
rotten wood of the piń tree and hit it on a rock, and thus made fire.
He gave fire to Čo̱kčura. Čo̱kčura gave fire to Totemo (a species of
kingfisher). Totemo gave it to all the others.”

A slightly different and less detailed version of the same story is as
follows:

“Tiritmo made fire. Totemo stole fire (from Tiritmo) and gave it to
Mo̱ičo (Rail). Mo̱ičo gave fire to all the people.”

The next version, which was taken down in Aka-J̌eru, I did not fully
understand.

“Some one shot an arrow. The arrow hit the hill of fire. Tiriń (a
species of kingfisher) found the arrow. It was on fire. He took the
fire to his camp. He would not give fire to any one. The others asked
him. They went to their homes. At night they came to Tiriń’s hut and
stole fire. They went away, each to his own place.”

There is a certain amount of obscurity about two other versions, which
are given in a translation as nearly literal as possible. “Maia Dik
(Sir Prawn) made fire. Some ko̱nmo (yam) leaves caught fire, being dry.
Maia Dik made a fire. Maia Dik slept. Maia Totemo (Sir Kingfisher)
stole fire and ran away. Maia Totemo made a fire. He cooked fish. When
he had eaten, he slept. Maia Mite (Sir Dove) stole fire (from Totemo)
and ran away.”

The other is as follows. “Piribi got fire from a stone. He threw fire
at Bilika. It set some ko̱nmo (yam) leaves on fire. Čo̱rolo (Parrot) got
fire (from the burning leaves). He gave it to the ancestors.”

These two legends were taken down in Aka-Čari, but they are perhaps
really Aka-Ko̱ra or Aka-J̌eru stories. I have the word piribi in my notes
as meaning a storm, but the translation is doubtful.

The next is an Aka-Kede version of what is the most widespread of the
legends.

“The ancestors had no fire. Bilika had fire. The ancestors tried to
steal fire from Bilika. Lirtit (Kingfisher) went one night while Bilika
was sleeping and stole fire. Bilika awoke and saw him going away with
the fire. She threw a pearl shell (ba) at him, which cut off his wings
and his tail. Lirtit dived into the water and swam with the fire to
Bet-’ra-kudu and gave it to Te̱pe. Te̱pe gave fire to Mite (the
bronze-winged dove). Mite gave it to the others [111].”

An Aka-Kede legend of the origin of the sun may conveniently be given
in this place, as it is connected with the possession of fire by
Bilika. “Bilika made fire of purum wood. One day, when she was very
angry, she started throwing fire about. One large fire-brand she threw
into the sky, and there it became the sun.” This legend explains the
name of the place Purum-at-čape, at which Bilika is said to have lived
when on earth. Purum is the name of a tree, not identified; at means
either “fire” or “fire-wood,” and čape means a village or a hut. The
whole word therefore means “Purum fire village.”

I did not obtain any legend of the origin of fire from the Oko̱-J̌uwo̱i
and Aka-Ko̱l tribes, but a version from each of these tribes has been
given by Mr Portman. A translation of Mr Portman’s Oko̱-J̌uwo̱i story is
as follows [112]. “Mo̱m Mirit [113] stole a fire-brand from
Kuro-t’on-mika while Bilik was sleeping. He gave the brand to the late
Leč, who then made fire at Karat-tatak-emi.”

Mr Portman’s Aka-Ko̱l story is somewhat obscure. “Bilik was sleeping at
To̱l-l’oko-tima. Luratut (Kingfisher) took away fire to Oko-emi. Ko̱lotat
went to Min-to̱ŋ-ta (taking with him fire from Oko-emi). At Min-to̱ŋ-ta
the fire went out. Ko̱lotat broke up the charred firewood and made fire
again (by blowing up the embers). They (the people there) became alive.
Owing to the fire they became alive. The ancestors (Jaŋil) thus got
fire at Min-to̱ŋ-ta village.”

From the A-Pučikwar tribe I only obtained one version of the fire
legend. “When the ancestors lived at Wota-emi, Bilik lived at
To̱l-l’oko-tima across the strait. In those days the ancestors had no
fire. Bilik took some wood of the tree called pe̱rat and broke it and
made fire for himself. Luratut (Kingfisher) came to To̱l-l’oko-tima
while Bilik was sleeping and stole some fire. Bilik awoke and saw
Luratut. He (Bilik) took up a lighted brand and threw it at Luratut. It
hit him in the back of the neck and burnt him. Luratut gave the fire to
the people at Wota-emi. Bilik was very angry about this and went away
to live in the sky.”

The kingfisher of the story (Alcedo beavani?) has a patch of bright red
feathers on its neck. This is where it was burnt by the brand thrown by
Bilik.

Mr Portman gives a slightly different version from the same tribe
[114]. “Bilik was sleeping at To̱l-l’oko-tima. Luratut went to bring
fire. He caught hold of the fire, and in doing so burnt Bilik. Bilik
awoke and seized some fire. He hit Luratut with the fire. Then he hit
Tarčal (a fish) with the fire. Čalter (another species of kingfisher)
caught hold of the fire. He gave it to the ancestors at Wota-emi. The
ancestors made fires.”

From the Akar-Bale tribe I obtained the following legend: “The people
had no fire. Dim-do̱ri (a fish) went and fetched fire from
J̌ereg-l’ar-mugu (the place of departed spirits). He came back and threw
the fire at the people and burnt them, and marked them all. The people
ran into the sea and became fishes. Dim-do̱ri went to shoot them with
his bow and arrows, and he also became a fish.” This story is supposed
to account for the bright colouring of certain species of fish.

Mr Portman gives a somewhat similar version from the same tribe [115].
“Dim-do̱ra (a fish), a very long time ago, at Keri-l’oŋ-tower, was
bringing fire from Puluga’s platform (fireplace). He, taking the fire,
burnt everybody with it. Bolub and Tarko̱r and Biličau fell into the sea
and became fishes. They took the fire to Rokwa-l’ar-toŋa village and
made fires there.”

Another Akar-Bale legend is that fire was given to the first ancestors
(Da Duku and In Bain) by Puluga. Still another is that fire was
obtained by the ancestors from Aga, the skink (Mabuia tytleri). The
mist that is often seen hanging over the jungle in small patches, after
rain or at dawn, is said to be the smoke of Aga’s fire. An island in
the Archipelago is called Aga l’od-baraij, Aga’s village.

Mr Portman gives an Aka-Bea legend, which, however, relates that the
events took place at Wota-emi in the A-Pučikwar country [116].

“Puluga was asleep at To̱l-l’oko-tima. Luratut came, stealing fire. The
fire burnt Puluga. Puluga awoke. Puluga seized some fire. Taking the
fire he burnt Luratut with it. Luratut took the fire. He burnt
Tar-čeker (another kind of kingfisher) with it in Wota-emi village. The
ancestors lit fires. They (the ancestors) were the Tomo-la.”

Mr Man gives three different versions of legends as to the origin of
fire. According to the first of these, Puluga, after he had made the
first man, Tomo, gave him fire and taught him its use. Puluga obtained
fire by stacking in alternate layers two kinds of wood known as co̱r and
ber, and then bidding the sun to come and sit on or near the pile until
she ignited it, after which she returned to her place in the sky [117].
The second version is that Puluga came to Tomo with a spirit named Lači
Puŋa Ablola to instruct Tomo, who at his direction, prepared a pyre and
then struck it, on which the fire was kindled and Puŋa Ablola proceeded
to teach him how to cook food [118]. This legend contains an obvious
contradiction. Lači Puŋa Ablola, as is shown by the name itself (Lači =
the late), is the name of some one who is supposed to have lived and
died and so become a spirit. Yet at the same time Tomo is supposed to
have been the first of the Andamanese. There is the possibility,
however, that this inconsistency is due not to the natives themselves,
but to Mr Man’s transcription. It is possible that the legend is that
fire was discovered and was given to the ancestors (the Tomo) by a
person who, being dead, is now Lači Puŋa Ablola, but who was then alive
and one of the ancestors (Tomo) themselves.

A third legend about fire given by Mr Man is associated by him with
another legend about a flood that once overwhelmed the ancestors.
According to Mr Man’s version the fires were all extinguished by the
flood, so that the few survivors were left without fire. “At this
juncture one of their recently deceased friends appeared in their midst
in the form of a bird named Luratut. Seeing their distress he flew up
to Mo̱ro, the sky, where he discovered Puluga seated beside his fire; he
thereupon seized and attempted to carry away in his beak a burning log,
but the heat, or weight, or both, rendered the task impossible, and the
blazing brand fell on Puluga, who, incensed with pain, hurled it at the
intruder; happily for those concerned, the missile missed its mark and
fell near the very spot where the survivors were deploring their
condition. As Luratut alighted in their midst at the same moment, he
gained the full credit for having removed the chief cause of their
distress [119].”

We may now consider a group of legends that relate how a great
catastrophe overwhelmed the ancestors. In many of the versions the
legend relates how the ancestors were transformed into animals. Some of
the legends are connected with Biliku or Puluga and others are
connected with the first discovery of fire. Beginning with the North
Andaman, the following is, I believe, an Aka-J̌eru version. “Mimi Čara
once broke some firewood in the evening (while the cicada was singing).
A great storm came and killed many people, who were turned into fishes
and birds. The water rose up till it covered the trees. Mimi Čara and
Mimi Kota took the fire and went up the hill to the cave at Ŋaram. They
carried the fire under a cooking-pot. They kept the fire alight in the
cave, until the storm was over.”

Another Aka-J̌eru legend was taken down hurriedly and the full details
were not obtained. “The people made a noise in the evening when Mite
(the cicada) was singing. Mite went to see her mother Biliku. Her
mother saw her eyes and face. She looked bad. Her eyes were red (with
weeping). Biliku was very angry. There was a big storm and heavy rain.
Biliku threw her pearl shells (lightning). She went mad. She destroyed
the whole world. Biliku went up to live in the sky. The earth was bare
(literally, empty). One day Biliku dropped a Dipterocarpus seed from
the sky. Out of this all the different kinds of tree grew, and the
earth was again covered with forest.” There was more of the legend,
which I was unable at the time to understand, and which I did not hear
again. My informant added “It was on this occasion that Maia Taolu
saved the fire.”

An Aka-Čari legend relates how the birds and beasts and fishes arose.
“Maia Dik (Sir Prawn) once got angry and threw fire at the people (the
ancestors). They all turned into birds and fishes. The birds flew into
the jungle. The fishes jumped into the sea. Maia Dik [120] himself
became a large prawn which is still called by the same name.” In
connection with this legend it must be remembered that it was Maia Dik,
according to one legend, who first discovered the use of fire. One
version of the story said that he made fire by striking a piece of
paraŋo wood. Then he threw the burning wood about amongst the ancestors
and they turned into birds and fishes.

An Aka-J̌eru version is very similar. “The people were all asleep. Maia
Ko̱lo (Sir Sea-eagle) came and threw fire amongst them. They awoke in a
fright and all ran in different directions. Some ran into the sea and
became fishes and turtle; others ran into the jungle and became birds.”

The Aka-Kede version of the catastrophe that overtook the ancestors is
as follows. “It was at the place called Čilpet. The people collected a
lot of honey. They refused to give any to Ko̱po-tera-wat (a bird, not
identified). The latter got very angry, and in the evening, when the
cicadæ were singing he made a great noise and disturbed their song.
Then there arose a great storm, and it rained very heavily, and the sea
rose over the land. It rose very rapidly till only the top of a big
Dipterocarpus tree showed above the water. The people took refuge in
the branches of this tree. Mima Mite (Lady Dove) managed to rescue some
fire and keep it alight under a cooking pot. The waters at length
subsided. Then the people did not know how to get down from the tree.
Mima Čarami-lebek made a long piece of string and with this she lowered
the people safely to the ground.” The čarami-lebek, which was not
identified, is a species of bird that lives, so the natives say, only
at the top of the very tallest trees of the forest.

An Aka-Ko̱l version of the same legend is as follows: “At first there
were no birds in the jungle and no fish in the sea. The ancestors were
playing one evening and making a noise while the peti (cicada) was
singing. Then Bilik got angry and sent a great cyclone. All the people
were turned into birds and fishes and turtles and jungle beasts.”

There is an A-Pučikwar legend that, in the days of the ancestors, there
was a big cyclone. There was a flood at Wota-emi and the water rose up
over the trees. Some of the ancestors climbed up into a big
Dipterocarpus tree and remained there till the waters had subsided. I
was not able to hear any more detailed version of the legend.

The following legend explaining how the ancestors were turned into
animals was told me by an A-Pučikwar man, but it is probably really of
Akar-Bale origin.

“It was in the days of the ancestors. Ta Ko̱lwo̱t (Sir Tree-lizard) went
over to a big meeting at Teb-ǰuru (in the Archipelago). There was a lot
of dancing. Ko̱lwo̱t decided to give a big dancing party of his own. He
invited everybody and they all came to his place. Ko̱lwo̱t danced a great
deal. He began to get wild. All the people were afraid, because he was
very strong. They caught hold of him by the arms. Ko̱lwo̱t got very
angry. He threw the people from him. He threw them so violently that
some fell in the sea and became fishes and turtle. Others fell on
different islands and became birds and animals. No one could hold
Ko̱lwo̱t. At last Berep (a species of crab) caught hold of his arm and
would not let go. And thus Berep stopped him. Before this there had
been no birds in the jungles nor any fish in the sea.”

A more complete version of this story was obtained from the Akar-Bale
tribe. “Da Tigbul (Sir Dugong) took all the people to dance at Kwaičo.
In Bain (Lady Civet-cat) told Da Kwo̱ko̱l (Sir Tree-lizard) that people
were coming from Tar-mugu to dance and that Da Karami [121] would
quarrel with him. Da Kwo̱ko̱l replied ‘Oh! I don’t care. I can fight all
those people easily enough.’ All the people came together for the dance
and Karami quarrelled with Kwo̱ko̱l. The latter got very angry. The
people were afraid. Tigbul (Dugong) caught hold of Kwo̱ko̱l by the arm.
Kwo̱ko̱l threw him from him with such force that Tigbul fell into the sea
and became a dugong. Then Kočurag-boa caught hold of Kwo̱ko̱l and Kwo̱ko̱l
threw him into the jungle [122]. Kwo̱ko̱l threw all the people into the
sea or into the jungle and they became birds and beasts and fishes. No
one could hold him. Da Kwo̱ko̱l went away to Teb-ǰuru. The people told Da
Berag (Sir Crab) what had happened at Kwaičo and how no one could hold
Da Kwo̱ko̱l. Da Berag went after him to Teb-ǰuru. Da Kwo̱ko̱l had covered
himself with ko̱iob (red paint) [123]. Da Berag pretended that he wanted
some paint to put on his upper lip, saying that he was sick. There was
no more red paint in the place, so Da Kwo̱ko̱l said ‘You had better come
and take some off me.’ Da Berag put his nose to Kwo̱ko̱l’s arm as though
to get some paint, and bit deeply into Kwo̱ko̱l’s shoulder. Kwo̱ko̱l could
not get loose, and so he died. The people at Teb-ǰuru attacked Da Berag
and beat him. They could not kill him, because his skin was too hard,
so they threw him into the sea. When Kwo̱ko̱l’s mother, Kegŋa, came and
found her son dead she was very angry. She wept for a long time. Then
she went into the jungle and cut the plant to̱kul which belongs to
Puluga. Puluga was angry because the to̱kul was cut and sent a big storm
which killed Kegŋa and all the other people in that place.”

Mr Man records another version of this legend.

“To explain the origin of certain fish, they say that one day before
the Deluge, Maia Ko̱lwo̱t went to visit an encampment of the Tomola
situated in the Archipelago. While engaged in his song the women,
through inattention to his instructions, marred the effect of the
chorus, so, to punish them, he seized his bow, whereupon the whole
party in terror fled in all directions; some escaping into the sea were
changed into dugongs, porpoises, sharks, and various other fish which
till then had not been seen [124].”

Mr Man gives still another version of the same story. “One day, at the
commencement of the rainy season, a tomola named Berebi came to visit
Ko̱lwo̱t’s mother, Čana Erep, with the express intention of seeing her
son, of whom he was extremely jealous. When he appeared Berebi
treacherously bit him in the arm, but his teeth became fixed in the
flesh and he was therefore unable to detach himself from his victim,
whose friends promptly avenged his murder, and disposed of the corpses
by throwing them into the sea. (Ko̱lwo̱t, after death, was transformed
into a species of tree-lizard, which is still named after him, and
Berebi became a fish called Koŋo, which is armed with a row of
poisonous barbs in its back.) The bereaved mother, in her rage, grief
and despair, committed various acts, against which Tomo had been warned
by Puluga, and while so doing incited others to follow her example by
the following words:—


        e, e, e, dia ra-gumul l’ab-dala,
        e, e, e, ŋul kaǰa piǰ pugatken,
        e, e, e, ŋul čoaken toaiken,
        e, e, e, ŋul boarato aga-kolaken,
        e, e, e, ŋul gono boaŋken,
        e, e, e, ŋul toŋ čoara boaŋken,
        e, e, e, ŋig arlot pulaiǰoken.


The translation of which is:—


        e, e, e (sobbing)— My grown-up handsome son,
        ,, ,, ,,    ,,     Burn the wax,
        ,, ,, ,,    ,,     Grind the seed of the čakan (Entada),
        ,, ,, ,,    ,,     Destroy the barata (Caryota),
        ,, ,, ,,    ,,     Dig up the gono (yam),
        ,, ,, ,,    ,,     Dig up the čati (yam),
        ,, ,, ,,    ,,     Destroy everything.


Thereupon Puluga was exceeding wroth, and sent the flood, that which
destroyed all living things with the exception of two men and two
women.

“This tradition is preserved in the following lines:—


        Keledoat ibaji lar čora,
        Ra-gumul ab-gorga en ig-boadi
        Ra-gumul le liga koarna
        Ra-gumul ab-gorka
        Toala arbo eb dagan čoarpo.


The meaning of which is:—


        Bring the boat to the beach
        I will see your fine grown-up son,
        The grown-up son who threw the youths (into the sea)
        The fine grown-up son,
        My adze is rusty, I will stain my lips with his blood.


In this, as in all their songs and chants, a good deal is left to the
imagination, but from their explanations which have been given by the
aborigines, the following appear to afford some light on the
subject:—Berebi, being jealous of the renown Ko̱lwo̱t had won for himself
by his numerous accomplishments and great strength, took advantage of
meeting him and his mother one day on the water to ask them to let him
enter their boat. On their complying with his request, he provided
himself with a rusty adze and hone, remarking on the rusty condition of
the former; then taking Ko̱lwo̱t by the arm he sniffed it from the wrist
to the shoulder as if admiring the development of the muscles; while
doing so he muttered the threat of staining his lips with blood, which
he shortly after fulfilled in the manner already described [125].”

As the songs given in this legend are in the Akar-Bale language
(Southern dialect), it is probable that the legend is an Akar-Bale one.
It is really another version of the legend already given.

Another Akar-Bale story tells how the first ancestors Duku, the monitor
lizard, and Bain the civet-cat, managed to keep the fire alight when a
flood overwhelmed them. “One day in the time of the ancestors there
came a great storm, and the water rose over the land. The rain put out
the fires. Da Duku (Sir Monitor Lizard) took a smouldering log and
tried to climb up a tree with it. He could not climb with the fire in
his hand. His wife In Bain (Lady Civet-cat) took the fire from him and
took it up to the top of a hill and there kept it alight till the rain
stopped and the water went away. The hill is called Bain l’it-čapa
(Bain’s fire) to the present day.” The hill is a rather steep-sided
hill of no great height in Havelock Island.

Mr Portman [126] connects the story of the flood with the story of the
dispersion of the ancestors over the islands. Referring to the names of
the tribes he says, “The Andamanese state that these names were given
to the different tribes by Maia Tomo-la when they were dispersed after
a cataclysm. They have a tradition that this group of tribes was once
all one tribe, and that the Andaman Islands were much larger than at
present. Some great cataclysm occurred during which part of the islands
subsided and many aborigines were drowned, the remainder being
separated into different territories as at present by the orders of
Maia Tomo-la, apparently the chief at that time of the collected tribe.
(The above is of course a matter-of-fact version of the fanciful and
impossible legends of the Andamanese.)”

The dispersion legend in the South Andaman is connected with the name
of the A-Pučikwar tribe. The name (of which the Aka-Bea equivalent is
Aka-Boǰig-yab) means “those who talk the original language,” it being
believed that the A-Pučikwar language was the one originally spoken by
the ancestors.

The only version of the dispersion legend that I heard was from the
Aka-Kede tribe. It was to the effect that Bilika once seized all the
ancestors and put them in a netted bag (such as the natives use for
carrying small objects of various kinds). She (or he) took them out a
few at a time and put them in different parts of the country, where
their descendants have been ever since.

Mr Man speaks of a legend of how the tribes came to be dispersed over
the islands. From his account it would seem that there were two
different dispersions, one before the Deluge, and a second after it. Mr
Man’s account is as follows. “Tomo lived to a great age, but even
before his death his offspring became so numerous that their home could
no longer accommodate them. At Puluga’s bidding they were furnished
with all necessary weapons, implements, and fire, and then scattered in
pairs all over the country. When this exodus occurred Puluga provided
each party with a distinct dialect. It would almost seem that, without
straining the legend to suit facts, we might discern in this a faint
echo of the Biblical account of the confusion of tongues and dispersion
at Babel [127].”

“Consequent on the disappearance of Tomo and his wife, the duties of
headship over the community at Wota-emi devolved on one of their
grandchildren, named Ko̱lwo̱t, who was distinguished by being the first
to spear and catch turtles. The tomola remained on the islands long
after Tomo’s transformation, but after Ko̱lwo̱t’s death, according to one
legend, they grew disobedient, and as Puluga ceased to visit them,
became more and more remiss in their observance of the commands given
at the creation. At last Puluga’s anger burst forth, and, without any
warning, he sent a great flood that covered the whole land, and
destroyed all living. Four persons (two men, Lo̱ra-lola and Po̱i-lola,
and two women, Ka-lola and Rima-lola), who happened to be in a canoe
when the catastrophe occurred, were able to effect an escape. When the
waters subsided, they found themselves near Wota-emi, where they landed
and discovered that every living thing on earth had perished; but
Puluga re-created the animals, birds, etc. [128].”

“When, for the second time in their history, their numbers had
increased to so great an extent that it became impossible for them to
remain together in one spot, an exodus, similar to the first, took
place; each party being furnished with fire and every other essential,
started in a different direction, and on settling down adopted a new
and distinct dialect. They each received a tribal name, and from them
have sprung the various tribes still existing on the islands [129].”

In the Southern tribes there is a legend to account for the origin of
night. The following version was obtained from the A-Pučikwar tribe.
“In the early days of the world, in the time of the ancestors, there
was no night; it was always day. Ta Pe̱tie (Sir Monitor Lizard) went
into the jungle to dig up yams. He found some yams. He also found some
resin (teki), and a cicada (ro̱to). He brought them to the camp of the
ancestors at Wota-emi. He sat down and the people came round him. Ta
Pe̱tie took the cicada and rubbed it between his hands and crushed it.
As he did this the cicada uttered its cry. Then the day went away and
it was dark. It remained dark for several days. The ancestors came
together and tried to get back the day. They made torches of resin, and
danced and sang songs. First Kotare (a bird) sang a song, but he could
not get back the daylight. Then Bumu (a beetle?) sang, but the day
would not come. Then Pecero̱l (the bulbul, Otocompsia emeria) sang, and
after him Ko̱io (a bird), but both in vain. Then Ko̱ŋoro (a species of
ant) sang a song and morning came. After that, day and night followed
one another alternately.”

A similar legend was obtained from the Akar-Bale tribe. “Da Teŋat [130]
lived at Golugma Bud. He went fishing one day and got only one small
fish of the kind called čelau (Glyphidodon sordidus?). He turned to go
home, and as he went he shot his arrows before him into the jungle
[131]. Then he went after his arrows to find them again. As he went he
spoke to the fruits of the jungle, asking them their names. In those
days the ancestors did not know the names of the fruits and trees.
First he asked the puiam, and then the guluba, and then the čakli, but
none of them replied to him. Then he found his first arrow. It was
stuck fast in a big yam (gono). He took the arrow and said to the yam
‘What is your name?’ At first the yam did not answer. Teŋat turned to
go away. He had gone a few steps when the yam called him back, saying
‘My name is gono.’ Teŋat replied ‘Oh! I did not know. Why did not you
say so before?’ He dug up the yam, which was a very big one. He went
off to look for his second arrow. As he went he spoke to the stones of
the jungle, asking their names, but none of them replied. Then he found
his second arrow fixed in a large lump of resin (tug) [132]. He took
the arrow, and as he was going away the resin called him back, saying
‘Here! my name is tug; you can take me along with you.’ So Teŋat took
the resin. Then Teŋat found a cicada (rita), and he took that also.
When Teŋat got to the hut (bud), everyone came to look at the things he
had brought. He showed them the yam. He told them its name and showed
them how to cook it. This was the first time that the ancestors ate
gono. Then Teŋat took in his hand the cicada and squashed it between
his palms. As he killed it the cicada uttered its cry and the whole
world became dark. When the people saw that it was dark they tried to
bring back the daylight. Teŋat took some of the resin and made torches.
He taught the people how to dance and sing. When Da Ko̱ŋoro (Sir Ant)
sang a song the day came back. After that the day and night came
alternately.”

Mr Man records a different version of this story.

“The manner in which the world was illuminated at the beginning is not
clearly to be ascertained from their legends, for one story states that
the sun and moon were subsequently created at Tomo’s request, as he
found that, under the then existing circumstances, it was impossible to
catch fish by night or to hunt by day; while, in direct disagreement
with this, another story tells us that night was a punishment brought
upon mankind by certain individuals who angered Puluga by killing a
caterpillar. The tale informs us that the sun, one day, burned so
fiercely as to cause great distress. Two women named Čana Limi and Čana
J̌araŋud, became exceedingly irritable, and while in this unhappy frame
of mind they discovered a caterpillar (gurug) and a certain plant
called utura. By way of venting their spleen, one crushed the helpless
grub, and the other destroyed the plant. These wanton acts so
displeased Puluga that he determined to punish them, and to teach them
to appreciate the privilege of daylight, which they had hitherto
uninterruptedly enjoyed. He accordingly visited the earth with a
long-continued darkness, which caused every one much inconvenience and
distress. At last their chief, Maia Ko̱lwo̱t, to whom reference has
already been made, hit upon a happy expedient of inducing Puluga to
restore the former state of things by trying to assure him that they
were quite unconcerned, and could enjoy themselves in spite of light
being withheld from them. To accomplish this, he invented the custom of
dancing and singing, the result of which was that Puluga, finding that
they had frustrated his intention, granted, as a first concession
alternate periods of day and night, and subsequently, moved by the
difficulties often occasioned by the latter, created the moon to
mitigate their troubles. It is in this way that they account for the
same word being used to denote a caterpillar and night [133].”

From the Akar-Bale tribe I obtained a legend about the origin of death.
No other version of the same legend was obtained.

“At J̌o̱ŋo-l’ar-bo̱ŋ lived In Kalwadi with her sons Yaramurud and Toau
[134]. Yaramurud went to hunt pig for his mother, but was unsuccessful.
When he came home his mother brought him some pork that was in the hut.
As he took his knife from the back of his neck to cut the meat with it,
he cut himself [135]. Then his mother knew that he was dead. She said
to him ‘You are dead now. You had better go away. We do not want you
here any more.’ She took him up and carried him into the jungle and
buried him, returning home. Very soon Yaramurud returned. His mother
exclaimed ‘Oh! I thought you had gone.’ He replied ‘Mother, I did not
die. Why did you bury me?’ But she knew he was dead, so she took him
and buried him again. He came back again. This happened three times.
Then Kalwadi took him into the jungle to a big dumla tree (Pisonia
excelsa), in which there was a big hole. She kicked the tree with her
foot and said ‘You go in there.’ Yaramurud went inside. ‘Well! Have you
gone?’ his mother asked. He answered ‘Yes!’ ‘Tell me how the spirits
(čauga) talk’ she asked him, and he replied ‘To̱ kit [136].’ Then his
mother knew that he was with the spirits, and said ‘Oh! my child, you
are finished now. You will never come back again.’ After a few days
Yaramurud came back (as a spirit) to see his brother Toau. Toau was
busy building a hut. When Yaramurud saw him he killed him. Before this
there had been no death. But In Kalwadi told the people, saying ‘You
see what has happened; well, we shall all of us die like this, like
these two have done’.”

There is a widespread legend to account for the origin of creeks and
islands. The following is an A-Pučikwar version.

“At first there was only one big island with the sea all round it.
There were no small islands and no creeks. Ko̱ŋoro (a species of ant)
made a turtle net and went fishing. He caught a very big fish of the
kind called ko̱ro-ŋiti-čau in his net, and dived down and attached a
rope to its tail. The fish got very angry and made furious plunges to
get away, striking the land in its struggles, and each time knocking
off a bit of the land or making a long split. This is the origin of the
smaller islands and the creeks.”

Mr Man records the same legend, but says it was Tomo who caught the
fish [137]. In an Akar-Bale version it was Da Pečero̱l who caught the
fish (ko̱roŋadi). Pečero̱l is the bulbul (Otocompsia emeria). I have the
name ko̱roŋadi in my notes as being Sphyraena acutipinnis, but the
identification is a doubtful one. In the Aka-Kede tribe there is a
version in which it is stated that one of the ancestors captured a fish
called talepo. This does not seem to be the same species of fish as
that called ko̱ro-ŋiti-čau or ko̱roŋadi in the South. In the North
Andaman the legend is that Pe̱rǰido, the son of Biliku, shot a large eel
(bol) with an arrow, and in its endeavours to get free from the arrow
the eel wriggled about till it made all the creeks.

In the Southern tribes there is a legend that relates how the pig first
got its senses. A version from the A-Pučikwar tribe is as follows.

“Ta Mita (Sir Dove) went into the jungle and found a lot of pigs. They
did not run away when he came because they had no eyes to see him, no
ears to hear, and no nostrils with which to smell. They had no mouths.
Mita made mouths for them and gave them tusks which he made of tobur
wood. He made eyes and ears and nostrils in their heads and taught them
how to grunt and how to sneeze [138].”

Another version from the same tribe is as follows.

“At first the pigs had neither nose nor ears nor eyes. They used to
stand about at Wota-emi when the ancestors lived there. The people ate
a great many of them. They were such a nuisance that Mita (Dove), the
wife of Tomo, thought of a plan to get them out of the way. She bored
holes in their heads, two for eyes, two for ears, and two for nostrils.
The pigs ran off into the forest where they have been ever since.”

I did not obtain any version of this legend from the Northern tribes.
The Aka-Kede have a different legend about the pigs.

“At first there were no pigs. One of the ancestors, Mimi Čau (Lady
Civet-cat), invented a new game, and made the ancestors run on all
fours and grunt. Those playing were turned into pigs, and went to live
in the jungle. Mimi Čau became a civet-cat (čau).”

In the North Andaman there is a legend connected with the pig which
explains the origin of the dugong.

“Pe̱rǰido was the first man to catch a pig. He went into the forest and
found a pig. Pe̱rǰido was hungry. He caught the pig and took it home.
The pig had no eyes nor ears nor mouth. Pe̱rǰido did not disembowel the
pig, nor did he sever the joints of its legs [139]. He made a fire and
put the pig on it. The pig swelled up in the heat of the fire and
burst. This made holes in the pig’s head, two for ears, two for eyes,
two for nostrils. The pig perceived that it was being burnt. It jumped
up from the fire and ran away. Pe̱rǰido threw a ko̱bo (Licuala) leaf at
it. The pig ran into the sea and became a dugong. The leaf became its
flipper.”

In the Aka-Čari tribe there is a legend describing the origin of
turtles.

“At first there was only one big turtle. He came to the camp of the
Aka-Čari people and called them, saying ‘Bring your canoes and catch
me.’ They got into their canoes and followed the turtle. They could not
catch him. The turtle swam away and the canoes followed. When the
canoes were far from land the big turtle came and upset the canoes. The
men were all turned into turtles of the same kind and size as those
that are seen now. The canoes (and the big turtle?) were turned into a
reef.”

In the South Andaman it is supposed that the custom of scarifying the
skin was invented by the first ancestor of the Andamanese, the monitor
lizard. An Akar-Bale version of the story is as follows.

“Duku (Monitor Lizard) lived with his wife Bain (Civet-cat). Duku said
‘I am going to scarify myself.’ His wife tried to dissuade him. He
would not listen to her. He went into the jungle and found a piece of
to̱lma (quartz) and scarified himself all over. His wife was very angry
and asked him why he had done it. Duku replied ‘I look very well like
this, and you will see, all the other people will do the same’.”

Mr Man gives a version of the same legend.

“Maia Duku, who appears to be identical with Tomo, is said to have been
the first to tattoo himself. One day, while out on a fishing
expedition, he shot an arrow; missing its object it struck a hard
substance which proved to be a piece of iron, the first ever found.
With it Duku made an arrow-head and tattooed himself, after which he
sang the ditty:—


    To̱ŋ ma lir pireŋa? to̱ŋ yitiken! to̱ŋ yitiken!
    to̱ŋ ma lir pireŋa? to̱ŋ yitiken!


the interpretation of which is


    ‘What can now strike me?
    I am tattooed, I am tattooed!’ etc. (Da capo) [140].”


It would seem that Mr Man, or else his informant, was not very clear
about the details of the legend. In the South Andaman scarification is
never performed with an arrow-head, nor with any instrument of iron,
but with a flake of quartz or glass. It is only in the North and Middle
Andaman that an arrow-head is used for such a purpose, and even then it
is only so used to make the big scars on the back and chest, the
ordinary scarification being performed with a flake of stone or glass.
The legend is certainly a Southern one, and the song given is in the
Aka-Bea language. The accuracy of the transcription of the legend
therefore seems very doubtful.

Yams and honey, being two of the most important foods of the Andaman
Islanders, are the subject of several legends. A common belief about
yams is that they were made, or their qualities were first discovered,
by Biliku or Puluga. We have already seen that there is a special
connection between Biliku (or Puluga) and the yams and other edible
roots. There are also other legends, however, on the same subject. An
account of the first discovery of the yam called gono is contained in
the Akar-Bale legend of the origin of night, already given [141].

In the North Andaman the following tale is told about the discovery of
one kind of yam.

“Maia Dik (Sir Prawn) discovered ko̱nmo (Dioscorea sp.). He was very
hungry and went to look for something to eat. He found a very large
ko̱nmo. There was only one ko̱nmo. He cooked it in the fire and ate as
much as he could. He dashed the remainder on a rock, and the fragments
scattered everywhere and grew into fresh plants. After this there were
plenty of ko̱nmo everywhere.”

A legend is also told in the North Andaman about the first discovery of
another kind of yam.

“Maia Pulimu (Sir Fly) and Maia Mo̱ičo (Sir Rail) went to hunt pig. They
killed one pig. There was nothing to tie up the pig (to carry it home).
Maia Pulimu went to look for a creeper (with which to tie up the pig).
He caught hold of a creeper and pulled it and found it was a mino
(Dioscorea sp.). Maia Pulimu was a long time away. Maia Mo̱ičo went and
found some creeper for himself and tied up the pig and carried it home.
When Maia Pulimu came back he found that Maia Mo̱ičo had gone and taken
the pig. He followed him and went home. He showed the ancestors how to
cook and eat mino.”

I believe that there is a fuller version of this legend, which I was
unable, however, to obtain. Another of my informants told me the story
as follows.

“Mimi Mo̱ičo (Lady Rail) had a son Pulimu (Fly). Pulimu found a mino in
the forest and brought it to his mother. They roasted it in the fire.”

Mr Man gives a story from the South Andaman.

“Another of their antediluvian ancestors was famous for propagating
yams. This was Maia Bumroag, who in shooting an arrow, struck the
creeper belonging to the favourite variety called gono; his curiosity
being excited he dug up the root, and tasted it: the result being
satisfactory, he informed his friends of his discovery, and they all
feasted upon it; when they had had sufficient, he scattered the remains
in different directions; this apparent waste so angered his mother
that, on pretence of shaving him, she split his head open with a flint.
After his death it was found that the act for which he had suffered had
tended to the spread of the plant which is now plentiful [142].”

In the North Andaman it is supposed that honey was discovered by
Pe̱rǰido the son of Biliku.

“Pe̱rǰido was the first to eat honey. One day he went to shoot fish. He
saw a nyuri (Plotosus sp.). The nyuri disappeared amongst the roots of
the mangrove trees. Pe̱rǰido was looking for the fish. There was a
honeycomb in a mangrove tree. Pe̱rǰido saw its reflection in the water.
He took some fire and tried to get the honey out of the water [143].
The water put out the fire. He could not get the honey. He went home
and told his mother what he had been doing. She went with him and saw
the honey. ‘What a fool you are’ she said, ‘don’t you see that it is in
the trees.’ Pe̱rǰido took some fire and smoked out the bees and took the
honey. After that Pe̱rǰido used to go and collect honey. He ate it all
himself. He did not tell the others (the ancestors) about it. Maia
Po̱rubi (Sir Frog) found out that Pe̱rǰido was getting honey and eating
it. He went in to the forest to look for some. He found five or six
combs. He ate them all and brought none home to his children. Be̱re̱t (a
smaller species of frog) was the child of Po̱rubi. One day Be̱re̱t said to
his father ‘Bring us some honey.’ The children went with their father
and showed him the combs in the trees. Po̱rubi went up the tree, and
each time he ate the honey in the tree and did not bring any of it down
for his children. Then Be̱re̱t saw another honeycomb in a very tall tree.
He pointed it out to his father. Po̱rubi went up to get it. Be̱re̱t cut
the creeper up which his father had climbed [144]. Po̱rubi wrapped up
the honeycomb to bring it down. Be̱re̱t said ‘Father, this creeper is
bad. How will you come down?’ Po̱rubi replied ‘How can it be bad, when I
have just climbed up it?’ Be̱re̱t made some sharp stakes of čo̱m (Areca)
wood, and put them round the tree. Po̱rubi jumped (or fell) from the
tree on to the stakes and was killed. Be̱re̱t took the honey and ran away
home.”

In the Aka-Čari tribe there is another legend connected with the frog
(po̱rubi) which may conveniently be given here.

“The ancestors were at enmity with Maia Po̱rubi. They went to kill him.
They shot him with their arrows, but they could not kill him. Maia
Po̱rubi caught hold of them all in his arms, and jumped into the sea. He
jumped from the hill called Čauanara. He found a big round stone
(boulder) and put the people under it and left them there. All the
people turned into stone, and may be seen there now. The next night
some more of the people went to hunt turtle near Maia Po̱rubi’s place.
They caught a turtle and shouted [145]. Maia Po̱rubi heard them
shouting. ‘They are coming again to kill me,’ he said. While they were
catching turtle he threw a round stone at them. The stone sank the
canoe. The canoe and the people in it were turned to stone.”

A story in which there is a connection between honey and a toad is
given by Mr Man.

“Another curious fable is told to account for a drought from which
their early ancestors suffered: it relates that once upon a time, in
the dry season, a woodpecker discovered a black honeycomb in the hollow
of a tree; while regaling himself on this dainty he observed a toad
eyeing him wistfully from below, so he invited him to join in the
feast; the toad gladly accepted, whereupon the woodpecker lowered a
creeper, giving instructions to his guest to fasten his bucket (dakar)
thereto, and then to seat himself in it, so that he might be drawn up.
The toad complied with the directions and the woodpecker proceeded to
haul him up; but just when he had brought him near the comb he
mischievously let go the creeper, and his confiding and expectant guest
experienced an unpleasant fall. The trick so exasperated him that he at
once repaired to the streams far and near in the island and drained
them, the result of which was that great distress was occasioned to all
the birds, as well as to the rest of the animate creation. The success
of his revenge so delighted the toad that, to show his satisfaction,
and to add to the annoyance of his enemies, he thoughtlessly began to
dance, whereupon all the water flowed from him, and the drought soon
terminated [146].”

One of the incidents of the North Andaman story of the frog (Po̱rubi)
and his son (Be̱re̱t) appears in a different story from the South and
Middle Andaman. The following is an Aka-Ko̱l version of this legend.

“Ta Mita (Sir Dove) and Ta Ko̱io (a species of small bird) went hunting
together and got a great number of pigs. Ta Ko̱io told Ta Mita to get
some canes to tie up all the pigs. As soon as Ta Mita had gone to look
for the cane, Ta Ko̱io went up a big Dipterocarpus tree, taking half the
pigs with him. He came down and took the rest of the pigs. He stayed up
in the tree with the pigs. When Ta Mita came back he found that the
pigs had disappeared. He was very angry and went home. As there was
nothing to eat, Mita and his two children, Čada and Čoda (two species
of fish) went fishing. Ko̱io was still up the tree. He was cooking the
pigs up there. Mita and his children passed under the tree and some
burning resin [147] fell on them. In this way they discovered that Ko̱io
was in the tree. Mita planned to punish Ko̱io. He cut a great number of
sharp stakes of Areca wood and fixed them all round the tree, pointing
upwards. Ko̱io was asleep. Mita made the tree sink into the ground. As
soon as it was low enough he took some water and threw it into the ear
of the sleeping Ko̱io, who awoke in a fright and jumped from the tree.
He was impaled on the stakes of wood and so died.”

Another version of the same tale was obtained from the Akar-Bale tribe.

“Da Bumu (a species of bird) went hunting pig with Da Berakwe (another
species of bird), and they got a large number of pigs. Then Berakwe
said to Bumu ‘We want some cane to tie up all these pigs. You go and
get it.’ When Bumu had gone Berakwe climbed up into a big Dipterocarpus
tree, taking all the pigs with him, except one very small one which he
left behind. When Bumu came back with the cane he found only one small
pig, and he was very angry. He went home with the pig. Bumu’s wife
Yakoŋ (a species of fish) said ‘I am very hungry. We will go and get
some fish by night.’ At night Yakoŋ went out to get some fish and she
passed under the tree where Berakwe was cooking his pigs. Some burning
resin fell on her and burnt her. She looked up and saw Berakwe and said
‘Oh! there you are; you stole all my husband’s pigs.’ She went home and
told Bumu. In the morning Bumu got up very early and cut a number of
pointed stakes of Areca (čam) wood, and fixed them all round the tree
where Berakwe was, with the sharp points upwards. Then Bumu made the
tree sink gradually into the ground. Berakwe fell from the tree on to
the stakes and so was killed. Bumu and his wife got the pigs.”

Mr Man records a version of the same story.

“The legend regarding the origin of the evil spirits known as Čo̱l is as
follows:—Their ancestor, Maia Čo̱l, one day stole a pig which had been
captured by Maia Ko̱lwo̱t, and climbed up into a gurjon-tree with his
prize. Now Maia Ko̱lwo̱t was remarkable for his great strength, and being
enraged, determined to revenge himself; he thereupon planted a number
of spikes all round the tree in which the thief had taken refuge, and
then proceeded to force it into the ground. On finding that if he
remained where he was, he must inevitably be buried alive, Maia Čo̱l
sprang off the tree, and thereby met a more terrible fate, for he was
impaled on the spikes, and perished miserably. His disembodied spirit
did not pass to Čaitan (Hades), but took up its abode on the invisible
bridge, where, by Puluga’s orders, numbers of his descendants were sent
to join him, in the form of black birds with long tails [148].”

In reference to this version it may be noted that the Čo̱l are not
“spirits” if that word is used to translate the native term čauga or
lau. Čo̱l is the name of a species of bird, which I believe is the
racket-tailed drongo. These birds, though according to Mr Man they live
on the rainbow, are to be seen every day in the jungle, and may be
heard calling čo̱l! čo̱l! čo̱l!

Throughout the Great Andaman there is a belief in a huge animal that
haunts the jungles, or that haunted them in the days of the ancestors.
In the North Andaman this beast is called J̌irmu. In the days of the
ancestors it is supposed to have lived at Ulibi-taŋ, where it attacked
and killed any men and women who came in its way. No detailed legend
about the J̌irmu was obtained.

In the Akar-Bale language Kočurag-boa is the name of the same or a
similar monster. In the A-Pučikwar language it is called Uču. This is
the name applied to two rocks of limestone which are situated about two
or three miles south of Wota-emi, one being in a mangrove swamp, and
the other some little way out in the sea. The following legend is told
about these rocks.

“In the early days of the Andamanese, Ta Pe̱tie (Sir Monitor Lizard),
the first ancestor, went into the jungle and found a čo̱ti tree, up
which he climbed to eat the fruit. The other people (who lived with him
at Wota-emi) came and found him, and Ta Pe̱tie threw down some of the
fruit to them, which they ate. The people began to bully Pe̱tie to make
him throw down more of the fruit. Pe̱tie got angry and said ‘If you
bully me like that I will call the Uču, and they will kill you all.’
The people only laughed at him. Pe̱tie called the Uču, calling ‘Dire!
dire!’ The Uču came, one male and one female. They caught all the
people and ate them. Only Pe̱tie they did not eat because he was up in
the high tree. The Uču went off to cross the strait to To̱l-l’oko-tima.
They had eaten so much that they were very heavy and stuck in the sand
and mud at the edge of the mangrove swamp. When Pe̱tie came down from
the tree he found all the people gone. He said ‘Hallo! the Uču must
have eaten them all.’ He went to look. He found the Uču stuck fast at
the edge of the mangrove swamp, so that they could not move. He cut
open their bellies and all the people came out, for the Uču had
swallowed them whole. The Uču are there to this day.”

When elephants were first introduced into the Andamans for the use of
the Forest Department, they were named Uču by the natives, and have
ever since retained that name. Similarly the natives of the Northern
tribes call them J̌irmu.

In the Akar-Bale tribe there is a legend to account for the origin of a
rock standing in the sea at a place called Kwaičo-bur.

“Ra-gumul Kwo̱ko̱l went fishing with his bow and arrows in the sea. His
bow and arrows and he himself were turned into stone, and may be seen
there to the present day.”

Kwo̱ko̱l is the common tree-lizard. Ra-gumul is the term applied to a
youth or girl who has just passed through the pig-eating ceremony
described in Chap. II. A youth is not permitted to handle a bow for
some days after the ceremony in question. A version of the same legend
is recorded by Mr Man.

“The story regarding certain Tomola who failed to observe the rules for
neophytes, states that, on the day after they broke their fast of
reg-ǰiri (kidney-fat of pig), they left the encampment without giving
notice of their intention to their friends, and the result was that,
when they were missed and searched for, it was found that they had gone
to the shore to fish, and had there met a sad fate; the body of one was
discovered adhering to a large boulder, and turned into stone, while
the other, likewise in a state of petrifaction, was standing erect
beside it [149].”

A reef on the east side of Ritchie’s Archipelago is said to have
originated as follows.

“The people of Kwaičo went to J̌ila to hunt turtle, taking two canoes.
While they were away their wives made up a big fire in the evening at
Kwaičo. The hunters and their canoes were turned to stone, and formed
the reefs that are now there.”

I believe that the explanation of this story is the belief that the
moon is angry when a bright fire is visible at the time when he rises
in the evening shortly after sunset [150].

There seems to be a legend relating to a large snake called o̱r-čubi in
the North Andaman, but I was not able to obtain a detailed version. The
following was told me in Aka-J̌eru.

“At Dalamio, in the time of the ancestors, there used to be a big snake
of the kind called o̱r-čubi. He used to catch men and women when they
were gathering honey, and kill them and eat them.”

An Akar-Bale version is a little fuller.

“There was a man named Biča who went to look for honey in the jungle.
He saw a big snake (wara-ǰobo) and from its neck was hanging a
honeycomb. The snake was as big as a tree. ‘Why don’t you make your
honey in the trees?’ Biča said to the bees. He went home and called
several of the men. They took their bows and arrows. They found the
snake, and shot it with a great many arrows. They could not kill the
snake, which ran away and was never seen again.”

An Akar-Bale story relates how the first murder came to pass.

“Da Ko (Sir Crow) was the first of the Andamanese. He lived at
Kared-čar-buaro with his wife In Mud (Lady Dove). He had a friend,
Badgi-beria (Hawk). Badgi-beria had no wife and was jealous of Da Ko
and wanted to get his wife. When Da Ko knew this he was very angry. He
went into the jungle and hid himself. By and by he saw Badgi-beria and
Mud coming along the path together. He took his bow and arrows and
killed them.”

Another Akar-Bale story about the dove is as follows.

“Mud and Kulal were cooking pig and got very hot. They went to bathe
and were turned into birds.”

Mud is the bronze-winged dove, Chalcophaps indica, and kulal is the
teal, Nettium albigulare.

In the North Andaman there are tales about the sea-eagle (ko̱lo). One is
to the effect that at first he used ko̱bo (Licuala) leaves to fly with.
This was before he had wings of his own. Another story is as follows.

“Maia Ko̱lo (Sir Sea-eagle) lived at Čona in Tau-’ra-miku. He had a hut
in the top of a to̱ro̱ktato tree. He was unmarried. When the men went
fishing he used to steal their wives. He would only take good-looking
girls. He would call out to a girl to come and catch hold of his foot,
saying ‘I have a fish for you.’ If an old or ugly woman came, he would
say ‘No! not you; go away.’ When a young woman came and caught hold of
his foot he flew away with her to his hut in the tree.”








CHAPTER V

THE INTERPRETATION OF ANDAMANESE CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS: CEREMONIAL


The present chapter is devoted to an attempt to interpret some of the
beliefs and customs of the Andaman Islanders, as they have been
described in the earlier part of this work. By the interpretation of a
custom is meant the discovery, not of its origin, but of its meaning.
The system of beliefs and customs that exists to-day in the Andamans is
the result of a long process of evolution. To seek the origin of these
customs, as the word origin is here used, is to seek to know the
details of the historical process by which they have come into
existence. In the absence of all historical records, the most that we
could do would be to attempt to make a hypothetical reconstruction of
the past, which, in the present state of ethnological science, would be
of very doubtful utility [151].

It is otherwise with the meaning of these customs. Every custom and
belief of a primitive society plays some determinate part in the social
life of the community, just as every organ of a living body plays some
part in the general life of the organism. The mass of institutions,
customs and beliefs forms a single whole or system that determines the
life of the society, and the life of a society is not less real, or
less subject to natural laws, than the life of an organism. To continue
the analogy, the study of the meaning of savage customs is a sort of
social physiology, and is to be distinguished from the study of
origins, or changes of custom in just the same way that animal
physiology is distinguished from the biology that deals with the origin
of species, the causes of variation, and the general laws of evolution.

The problems that this chapter presents are therefore not historical
but psychological or sociological. We have to explain why it is that
the Andamanese think and act in certain ways. The explanation of each
single custom is provided by showing what is its relation to the other
customs of the Andamanese and to their general system of ideas and
sentiments.

Thus the subject of the present chapter is not in any way affected by
questions of the historical origin of the customs with which it deals,
but is concerned only with those customs as they exist at the present
day. Nor are we concerned with the comparison of the customs of the
Andamanese with those of other savage races. Such comparisons are not
only valueless for our purpose, but might be misleading. To draw any
valid conclusion from the comparison of two apparently similar customs
in two different societies, we must be sure that they are really
similar, and to do this we need to know the true meaning of each of
them considered by itself. The true comparative method consists of the
comparison, not of one isolated custom of one society with a similar
custom of another, but of the whole system of institutions, customs and
beliefs of one society with that of another. In a word, what we need to
compare is not institutions but social systems or types.

It is often urged that in ethnology description and interpretation
should be most carefully separated. So far as this means that the facts
observed by the ethnologist should be recorded free from all bias of
interpretation, the necessity cannot be too often or too strongly
urged. If, however, it is meant to imply that efforts at interpretation
are to be excluded from works of descriptive ethnology, there is much
to be said against such an opinion. In trying to interpret the
institutions of a primitive society the field ethnologist has a great
advantage over those who know the facts only at second hand. However
exact and detailed the description of a primitive people may be, there
remains much that cannot be put into such a description. Living, as he
must, in daily contact with the people he is studying, the field
ethnologist comes gradually to “understand” them, if we may use the
term. He acquires a series of multitudinous impressions, each slight
and often vague, that guide him in his dealings with them. The better
the observer the more accurate will be his general impression of the
mental peculiarities of the race. This general impression it is
impossible to analyse, and so to record and convey to others. Yet it
may be of the greatest service when it comes to interpreting the
beliefs and practices of a primitive society. If it does not give any
positive aid towards a correct interpretation, it at least prevents
errors into which it is only too easy for those to fall who have not
the same immediate knowledge of the people and their ways. Indeed it
may be urged, with some reason, that attempts to interpret the beliefs
of savages without any first-hand knowledge of the people whose beliefs
are in question, are at the best unsatisfactory and open to many
possibilities of error.

The present position of ethnological studies may well be regarded as
anomalous. Many of the observers engaged in recording the customs of
primitive people are very imperfectly acquainted with modern theories
of sociology. One result of this is that they often neglect to record
anything concerning matters that are of fundamental importance for the
theorist [152]. On the other hand those engaged in elaborating
hypotheses do not, as a rule, observe for themselves the facts to be
explained, but have to rely on what are in many cases imperfect
documents, being thus unwittingly led into errors that might have been
avoided. In this science, as in others, if progress is to be made, the
elaboration of hypotheses and the observation and classification of
facts must be carried on as interdependent parts of one process, and no
advantage, but rather great disadvantage, results from the false
division of labour whereby theorists and observers work independently
and without systematic cooperation. The most urgent need of ethnology
at the present time is a series of investigations of the kind here
attempted, in which the observation and the analysis and interpretation
of the institutions of some one primitive people are carried on
together by the ethnologist working in the field.

It is clear that such studies need to be based on a scientific and
carefully elaborated method. Unfortunately ethnologists are not yet
agreed as to the methods of their science. The question of method is
therefore, at the present time, of the greatest importance, and for
this reason I have tried, in the present chapter, to present the
argument in such a way that the various steps of the analysis shall be
immediately apparent, so that the reader may be able not only to judge
the value of the conclusions, but also to form a clear idea of the
psychological methods by which they are reached.

Any attempt to explain or interpret the particular beliefs and customs
of a savage people is necessarily based on some general psychological
hypothesis as to the real nature of the phenomena to be explained. The
sound rule of method is therefore to formulate clearly and explicitly
the working hypothesis on which the interpretation is based. It is only
in this way that its value can be properly tested.

The hypothesis that seems to be most usually adopted by English writers
on anthropology is that the beliefs of savage peoples are due to
attempts on the part of primitive man to explain to himself the
phenomena of life and nature. The student of human customs, examining
his own mind, finds that one of the motives most constantly present in
his consciousness is the desire to understand, to explain—in other
words what we call scientific curiosity. He concludes that this motive
is equally insistent in the mind of primitive man. Thus he supposes
that primitive man, wishing to explain the phenomena of death and of
sleep and dreams, framed a hypothesis that every man possesses a soul
or spiritual double [153]. The hypothesis, once formulated, is supposed
to have been accepted and believed because it satisfied this need of
comprehension. On this view the belief in a soul (animism) is exactly
similar in character to the scientific belief in atoms, let us say. The
same general hypothesis appears in the explanation of totemism as
having arisen as a theory invented by primitive man in order to explain
the phenomena of pregnancy and childbirth [154].

On this hypothesis the beliefs are primary, arising first merely as
beliefs and then acquiring the power to influence action and so giving
rise to all sorts of ceremonies and customs. Thus these customs are
only to be explained by showing that they depend on particular beliefs.
This hypothesis, which we may call the intellectualist hypothesis, has
never, so far as I am aware, been very clearly formulated or defended,
but it does seem to underlie many of the explanations of the customs of
primitive man to be found in works on ethnology.

A second hypothesis explains the beliefs of primitive man as being due
to emotions of surprise and terror [155], or of awe and wonder [156]
aroused by the contemplation of the phenomena of nature.

Both these hypotheses may be held together, one being used to explain
some primitive beliefs and the other to explain others [157].

Doubtless there are other psychological hypotheses underlying the many
attempts that have been made to explain the customs of primitive
peoples, but these two seem to be the most important and the most
widespread. They are mentioned here, not in order to criticise them,
but in order to contrast them with the hypothesis to be formulated in
the present chapter [158].

Stated as briefly as possible the working hypothesis here adopted is as
follows. (1) A society depends for its existence on the presence in the
minds of its members of a certain system of sentiments [159] by which
the conduct of the individual is regulated in conformity with the needs
of the society. (2) Every feature of the social system itself and every
event or object that in any way affects the well-being or the cohesion
of the society becomes an object of this system of sentiments. (3) In
human society the sentiments in question are not innate but are
developed in the individual by the action of the society upon him. (4)
The ceremonial customs of a society are a means by which the sentiments
in question are given collective expression on appropriate occasions.
(5) The ceremonial (i.e. collective) expression of any sentiment serves
both to maintain it at the requisite degree of intensity in the mind of
the individual and to transmit it from one generation to another.
Without such expression the sentiments involved could not exist.

Using the term “social function” to denote the effects of an
institution (custom or belief) in so far as they concern the society
and its solidarity or cohesion, the hypothesis of this chapter may be
more briefly resumed in the statement that the social function of the
ceremonial customs of the Andaman Islanders is to maintain and to
transmit from one generation to another the emotional dispositions on
which the society (as it is constituted) depends for its existence.

The present chapter contains an attempt to apply this hypothesis to the
ceremonial customs of the Andaman Islanders. An attempt will be made to
show that there is a correspondence between the customs and beliefs of
the Andamanese and a certain system of social sentiments, and that
there is also a correspondence between these sentiments and the manner
in which the society is constituted. It is an attempt to discover
necessary connections between the different characters of a society as
they exist in the present. No attempt will be made to discover or
imagine the historical process by which these customs have come into
existence.

For the clearer understanding of the argument it is necessary to draw
attention to a few rules of method that will be observed. (1) In
explaining any given custom it is necessary to take into account the
explanation given by the natives themselves. Although these
explanations are not of the same kind as the scientific explanations
that are the objects of our search yet they are of great importance as
data. Like the civilised man of Western Europe the savage of the
Andamans seeks to rationalise his behaviour; being impelled to certain
actions by mental dispositions of whose origin and real nature he is
unaware, he seeks to formulate reasons for his conduct, or even if he
does not so when left to himself he is compelled to when the enquiring
ethnologist attacks him with questions. Such a reason as is produced by
this process of rationalisation is rarely if ever identical with the
psychological cause of the action that it justifies, yet it will nearly
always help us in our search for the cause. At any rate the reason
given as explaining an action is so intimately connected with the
action itself that we cannot regard any hypothesis as to the meaning of
a custom as being satisfactory unless it explains not only the custom
but also the reasons that the natives give for following it. (2) The
assumption is made that when the same or a similar custom is practised
on different occasions it has the same or a similar meaning in all of
them. For example, there are different occasions on which a personal
name is avoided; it is assumed that there is something in common to all
these occasions and that the meaning of the custom is to be discovered
by ascertaining what that common element is. (3) It is assumed that
when different customs are practised together on one and the same
occasion there is a common element in the customs. This rule is the
inverse of the last. As an example may be mentioned the different
customs observed by mourners, which may be assumed to be all related to
one another. The discovery of what is common to them all will explain
the meaning of each. (4) I have avoided, as being misleading as well as
unnecessary, any comparison of Andamanese customs with similar customs
of other races. Only in one or two instances have I broken this rule,
and in those I believe I am justified by special considerations.

We can conveniently begin by considering the Andamanese marriage
ceremony, which is one of the simplest and most easily understood. The
main feature of it is that the bride and bridegroom are required
publicly to embrace each other. In the North Andaman the embrace is
made gradually, by stages as it were, each stage being more intimate
than the preceding. At first the two sit side by side, then their arms
are placed around each other, and finally the bridegroom is made to sit
on the bride’s lap [160].

Everywhere in human life the embrace is employed as an expression of
such feelings as love, affection, friendship, i.e. of feelings of
attachment between persons. There is no need to enquire into the
psycho-physical basis of this expression. It is probably intimately
related to the nursing of the infant by the mother, and is certainly
very closely connected with the development of the sex instinct. It is
sufficient for our purpose to satisfy ourselves that the embrace in all
its forms does always express feelings of one generic kind. Nor is it
necessary for us to consider the peculiar form of the Andamanese
embrace, in which one person sits down and extends his or her legs,
while the other person sits on the lap so formed and the two wrap their
arms round one another’s necks and shoulders.

The meaning of the marriage ceremony is readily seen. By marriage the
man and woman are brought into a special and intimate relation to one
another; they are, as we say, united. The social union is symbolised or
expressed by the physical union of the embrace. The ceremony brings
vividly to the minds of the young couple and also to those of the
spectators the consciousness that the two are entering upon a new
social relation of which the essential feature is the affection in
which they must hold one another.

The rite has two aspects according as we regard it from the standpoint
of the witnesses or from that of the couple themselves. The witnesses,
by their presence, give their sanction to the union that is thus
enacted before them. The man who conducts the ceremony is merely the
active representative of the community; in what he does and says he
acts as a deputy and not as a private individual. Thus the ceremony
serves to make it clear that the marriage is a matter which concerns
not only those who are entering into it, but the whole community, and
its occasional performance serves to keep alive this sentiment with
regard to marriage in general. The existence of the sentiment is shown
in the reprobation felt and often expressed at an irregular marriage,
in which the couple unite without a ceremony; such a union showing a
contemptuous or careless thrusting aside of an important social
principle.

For the witnesses, then, the ceremony serves to awaken to activity and
to express this sentiment; but it also serves as a recognition on their
part of the change of status of the marrying pair. It makes them
realise that henceforward the young couple must be treated no longer as
children but as responsible adults, and it is thus the occasion of a
change of sentiment towards those whose social position is being
changed. For in the society of the Andamans there is a very marked
division between married and unmarried persons in the way in which they
are regarded by others, and in respect of their place in the community.

The married couple are made to realise, in a different way and with a
much greater intensity of feeling, these same two things; first, that
their union in marriage is a matter that concerns the whole community,
and second, that they are entering a new condition, with new privileges
but also with new duties and obligations. For them, indeed, the
ceremony is a sort of ordeal from which they would only too gladly
escape, and which, by the powerful emotions it evokes in them very
vividly impresses upon them what their marriage means.

The wedding gifts that are bestowed upon the young couple are an
expression of the general good-will towards them. The giving of
presents is a common method of expressing friendship in the Andamans.
Thus when two friends meet after separation, the first thing they do
after having embraced and wept together, is to give one another
presents. In most instances the giving is reciprocal, and is therefore
really an exchange. If a present be given as a sign of good-will the
giver expects to receive a present of about equal value in return. The
reason for this is obvious; the one has expressed his good-will towards
the other, and if the feeling is reciprocated a return present must be
given in order to express it. So also it would be an insult to refuse a
present offered, for to do so would be equivalent to rejecting the
good-will it represents. At marriage the giving is one-sided, no return
being expected, for it is an expression not of personal friendship on
the part of the givers, but of the general social good-will and
approval. It is for this reason that it is the duty of everybody who is
present to make some gift to the newly-married pair.

In another simple ceremony, the peace-making ceremony of the North
Andaman [161], the meaning is again easily discovered; the symbolism of
the dance being indeed at once obvious to a witness, though perhaps not
quite so obvious from the description given. The dancers are divided
into two parties. The actions of the one party throughout are
expressions of their aggressive feelings towards the other. This is
clear enough in the shouting, the threatening gestures, and the way in
which each member of the “attacking” party gives a good shaking to each
member of the other party. On the other side what is expressed may be
described as complete passivity; the performers stand quite still
throughout the whole dance, taking care to show neither fear nor
resentment at the treatment to which they have to submit. Thus those of
the one side give collective expression to their collective anger,
which is thereby appeased. The others, by passively submitting to this,
humbling themselves before the just wrath of their enemies, expiate
their wrongs. Anger appeased dies down; wrongs expiated are forgiven
and forgotten; the enmity is at an end.

The screen of fibre against which the passive participants in the
ceremony stand has a peculiar symbolic meaning that will be explained
later in the chapter. The only other elements of the ceremony are the
weeping together, which will be dealt with very soon, and the exchange
of weapons, which is simply a special form of the rite of exchanging
presents as an expression of good-will. The special form is
particularly appropriate as it would seem to ensure at least some
months of friendship, for you cannot go out to fight a man with his
weapons while he has yours.

The purpose of the ceremony is clearly to produce a change in the
feelings of the two parties towards one another, feelings of enmity
being replaced through it by feelings of friendship and solidarity. It
depends for its effect on the fact that anger and similar aggressive
feelings may be appeased by being freely expressed. Its social function
is to restore the condition of solidarity between two local groups that
has been destroyed by some act of offence.

The marriage ceremony and the peace-making dance both afford examples
of the custom which the Andamanese have of weeping together under
certain circumstances. The principal occasions of this ceremonial
weeping are as follows: (1) when two friends or relatives meet after
having been for some time parted, they embrace each other and weep
together; (2) at the peace-making ceremony the two parties of former
enemies weep together, embracing each other; (3) at the end of the
period of mourning the friends of the mourners (who have not themselves
been mourning) weep with the latter; (4) after a death the relatives
and friends embrace the corpse and weep over it; (5) when the bones of
a dead man or woman are recovered from the grave they are wept over;
(6) on the occasion of a marriage the relatives of each weep over the
bride and bridegroom; (7) at various stages of the initiation
ceremonies the female relatives of a youth or girl weep over him or
her.

First of all it is necessary to note that not in any of the
above-mentioned instances is the weeping simply a spontaneous
expression of feeling. It is always a rite the proper performance of
which is demanded by custom. (As mentioned in an earlier chapter, the
Andamanese are able to sit down and shed tears at will.) Nor can we
explain the weeping as being an expression of sorrow. It is true that
some of the occasions are such as to produce sorrowful feelings (4 and
5, for example), but there are others on which there would seem to be
no reason for sorrow but rather for joy. The Andamanese do weep from
sorrow and spontaneously. A child cries when he is scolded or hurt; a
widow weeps thinking of her recently dead husband. Men rarely weep
spontaneously for any reason, though they shed tears abundantly when
taking part in the rite. The weeping on the occasions enumerated is
therefore not a spontaneous expression of individual emotion but is an
example of what I have called ceremonial customs. In certain
circumstances men and women are required by custom to embrace one
another and weep, and if they neglected to do so it would be an offence
condemned by all right-thinking persons.

According to the postulate of method laid down at the beginning of the
chapter we have to seek such an explanation of this custom as will
account for all the different occasions on which the rite is performed,
since we must assume that one and the same rite has the same meaning in
whatever circumstances it may take place. It must be noted, however,
that there are two varieties of the rite. In the first three instances
enumerated above the rite is reciprocal, i.e. two persons or two
distinct groups of persons weep together and embrace each other, both
parties to the rite being active. In the other four instances it is
one-sided; a person or group of persons weeps over another person (or
the relics of a person) who has only a passive part in the ceremony.
Any explanation, to be satisfactory, must take account of the
difference between these two varieties.

I would explain the rite as being an expression of that feeling of
attachment between persons which is of such importance in the almost
domestic life of the Andaman society. In other words the purpose of the
rite is to affirm the existence of a social bond between two or more
persons.

There are two elements in the ceremony, the embrace and the weeping. We
have already seen that the embrace is an expression, in the Andamans as
elsewhere, of the feeling of attachment, i.e. the feeling of which
love, friendship, affection are varieties. Turning to the second
element of the ceremony, we are accustomed to think of weeping as more
particularly an expression of sorrow. We are familiar, however, with
tears of joy, and I have myself observed tears that were the result
neither of joy nor of sorrow but of a sudden overwhelming feeling of
affection. I believe that we may describe weeping as being a means by
which the mind obtains relief from a condition of emotional tension,
and that it is because such conditions of tension are most common in
feelings of grief and pain that weeping comes to be associated with
painful feelings. It is impossible here to discuss this subject, and I
am therefore compelled to assume without proof this proposition on
which my explanation of the rite is based [162]. My own conclusion,
based on careful observation, is that in this rite the weeping is an
expression of what has been called the tender emotion [163]. Without
doubt, on some of the occasions of the rite, as when weeping over a
dead friend, the participants are suffering a painful emotion, but this
is evidently not so on all occasions. It is true, however, as I shall
show, that on every occasion of the rite there is a condition of
emotional tension due to the sudden calling into activity of the
sentiment of personal attachment.

When two friends or relatives meet after having been separated, the
social relation between them that has been interrupted is about to be
renewed. This social relation implies or depends upon the existence of
a specific bond of solidarity between them. The weeping rite (together
with the subsequent exchange of presents) is the affirmation of this
bond. The rite, which, it must be remembered, is obligatory, compels
the two participants to act as though they felt certain emotions, and
thereby does, to some extent, produce those emotions in them. When the
two friends meet their first feeling seems to be one of shyness mingled
with pleasure at seeing each other again. This is according to the
statements of the natives as well as my own observation. Now this
shyness (the Andamanese use the same word as they do for “shame”) is
itself a condition of emotional tension, which has to be relieved in
some way. The embrace awakens to full activity that feeling of
affection or friendship that has been dormant and which it is the
business of the rite to renew. The weeping gives relief to the
emotional tension just noted, and also reinforces the effect of the
embrace. This it does owing to the fact that a strong feeling of
personal attachment is always produced when two persons join together
in sharing and simultaneously expressing one and the same emotion
[164]. The little ceremony thus serves to dispel the initial feeling of
shyness and to reinstate the condition of intimacy and affection that
existed before the separation.

In the peace-making ceremony the purpose of the whole rite is to
abolish a condition of enmity and replace it by one of friendship. The
once friendly relations between the two groups have been interrupted by
a longer or shorter period of antagonism. We have seen that the effect
of the dance is to dispel the wrath of the one group by giving it free
expression. The weeping that follows is the renewal of the friendship.
The rite is here exactly parallel to that on the meeting of two
friends, except that not two individuals but two groups are concerned,
and that owing to the number of persons involved the emotional
condition is one of much greater intensity [165]. Here therefore also
we see that the rite is an affirmation of solidarity or social union,
in this instance between the groups, and that the rule is in its nature
such as to make the participants feel that they are bound to each other
by ties of friendship.

We now come to a more difficult example of the rite, that at the end of
mourning. It will be shown later in the chapter that during the period
of mourning the mourners are cut off from the ordinary life of the
community. By reason of the ties that still bind them to the dead
person they are placed, as it were, outside the society and the bonds
that unite them to their group are temporarily loosened. At the end of
the mourning period they re-enter the society and take up once more
their place in the social life. Their return to the community is the
occasion on which they and their friends weep together. In this
instance also, therefore, the rite may be explained as having for its
purpose the renewal of the social relations that have been interrupted.
This explanation will seem more convincing when we have considered in
detail the customs of mourning. If it be accepted, then it may be seen
that in the first three instances of the rite of weeping (those in
which the action is reciprocal) we have conditions in which social
relations that have been interrupted are about to be renewed, and the
rite serves as a ceremony of aggregation.

Let us now consider the second variety of the rite, and first of all
its meaning as part of the ceremony of marriage. By marriage the social
bonds that have to that time united the bride and bridegroom to their
respective relatives, particularly their female relatives such as
mother, mother’s sister, father’s sister and adopted mother, are
modified. The unmarried youth or girl is in a position of dependence
upon his or her older relatives, and by the marriage this dependence is
partly abolished. Whereas the principal duties of the bride were
formerly those towards her mother and older female relatives,
henceforth her chief duties in life will be towards her husband. The
position of the bridegroom is similar, and it must be noted that his
social relations with his male relatives are less affected by his
marriage than those with his female relatives. Yet, though the ties
that have bound the bride and bridegroom to their relatives are about
to be modified or partially destroyed by the new ties of marriage with
its new duties and rights they will still continue to exist in a
weakened and changed condition. The rite of weeping is the expression
of this. It serves to make real (by feeling), in those taking part in
it, the presence of the social ties that are being modified.

When the mother of the bride or bridegroom weeps at a marriage she
feels that her son or daughter is being taken from her care. She has
the sorrow of a partial separation and she consoles herself by
expressing in the rite her continued feeling of tenderness and
affection towards him in the new condition that he is entering upon.
For her the chief result of the rite is to make her feel that her child
is still an object of her affection, still bound to her by close ties,
in spite of the fact that he or she is being taken from her care.

Exactly the same explanation holds with regard to the weeping at the
initiation ceremonies. By these ceremonies the youth (or girl) is
gradually withdrawn from a condition of dependence on his mother and
older female relatives and is made an independent member of the
community. The initiation is a long process that is only completed by
marriage. At every stage of the lengthy ceremonies therefore, the
social ties that unite the initiate to these relatives are modified or
weakened, and the rite of weeping is the means by which the
significance of the change is impressed upon those taking part in it.
For the mother the weeping expresses her resignation at her necessary
loss, and acts as a consolation by making her feel that her son is
still hers, though now being withdrawn from her care. For the boy the
rite has a different meaning. He realises that he is no longer merely a
child, dependent upon his mother, but is now entering upon manhood. His
former feelings towards his mother must be modified. That he is being
separated from her is, for him, the most important aspect of the
matter, and therefore while she weeps he must give no sign of
tenderness in return but must sit passive and silent. So also in the
marriage ceremony, the rite serves to impress upon the young man and
woman that they are, by reason of the new ties that they are forming
with one another, severing their ties with their families.

When a person dies the social bonds that unite him to the survivors are
profoundly modified. They are not in an instant utterly destroyed, as
we shall see better when we deal with the funeral and mourning customs,
for the friends and relatives still feel towards the dead person that
affection in which they held him when alive, and this has now become a
source of deep grief. It is this affection still binding them to him
that they express in the rite of weeping over the corpse. Here rite and
natural expression of emotion coincide, but it must be noted that the
weeping is obligatory, a matter of duty. In this instance, then, the
rite is similar to that at marriage and initiation. The man is by death
cut off from the society to which he belonged, and from association
with his friends, but the latter still feel towards him that attachment
that bound them together while he lived, and it is this attachment that
they express when they embrace the lifeless corpse and weep over it.

There remains only one more instance of the rite to be considered. When
the period of mourning for a dead person is over and the bones are
recovered the modification in the relations between the dead and the
living, which begins at death, and is, as we shall see, carried out by
the mourning customs and ceremonies, is finally accomplished. The dead
person is now entirely cut off from the world of the living, save that
his bones are to be treasured as relics and amulets. The weeping over
the bones must be taken, I think, as a rite of aggregation whereby the
bones as representative of the dead person (all that is left of him)
are received back into the society henceforth to fill a special place
in the social life. It really constitutes a renewal of social relations
with the dead person, after a period during which all active social
relations have been interrupted owing to the danger in all contact
between the living and the dead. By the rite the affection that was
once felt towards the dead person is revived and is now directed to the
skeletal relics of the man or woman that once was their object. If this
explanation seem unsatisfactory, I would ask the reader to suspend his
judgment until the funeral customs of the Andamans have been discussed,
and then to return to this point.

The proffered explanation of the rite of weeping should now be plain. I
regard it as being the affirmation of a bond of social solidarity
between those taking part in it, and as producing in them a realisation
of that bond by arousing the sentiment of attachment. In some instances
the rite therefore serves to renew social relations when they have been
interrupted, and in such instances the rite is reciprocal. In others it
serves to show the continued existence of the social bond when it is
being weakened or modified, as by marriage, initiation or death. In all
instances we may say that the purpose of the rite is to bring about a
new state of the affective dispositions that regulate the conduct of
persons to one another, either by reviving sentiments that have lain
dormant, or producing a recognition of a change in the condition of
personal relations.

The study of these simple ceremonies has shown us several things of
importance. (1) In every instance the ceremony is the expression of an
affective state of mind shared by two or more persons. Thus the weeping
rite expresses feelings of solidarity, the exchange of presents
expresses good-will. (2) But the ceremonies are not spontaneous
expressions of feeling; they are all customary actions to which the
sentiment of obligation attaches, which it is the duty of persons to
perform on certain definite occasions. It is the duty of everyone in a
community to give presents at a wedding; it is the duty of relatives to
weep together when they meet. (3) In every instance the ceremony is to
be explained by reference to fundamental laws regulating the affective
life of human beings. It is not our business here to analyse these
phenomena but only to satisfy ourselves that they are real. That
weeping is an outlet for emotional excitement, that the free expression
of aggressive feelings causes them to die out instead of smouldering
on, that an embrace is an expression of feelings of attachment between
persons: these are the psychological generalisations upon which are
based the explanations given above of various ceremonies of the
Andamanese. (4) Finally, we have seen that each of the ceremonies
serves to renew or to modify in the minds of those taking part in it
some one or more of the social sentiments. The peace-making ceremony is
a method by which feelings of enmity are exchanged for feelings of
friendship. The marriage rite serves to arouse in the minds of the
marrying pair a sense of their obligations as married folk, and to
bring about in the minds of the witnesses a change of feeling towards
the young people such as should properly accompany their change of
social status. The weeping and exchange of presents when friends come
together is a means of renewing their feelings of attachment to one
another. The weeping at marriage, at initiation, and on the occasion of
a death is a reaction of defence or compensation when feelings of
solidarity are attacked by a partial breaking of the social ties that
bind persons to one another.

In the ceremonial life of the Andamans some part is played by dancing,
and it will be convenient to consider next the meaning and function of
the dance. It is necessary, however, to deal very briefly with this
subject and omit much that would have to be included in an exhaustive
study. Thus the ordinary Andaman dance may be looked upon as a form of
play; it also shows us the beginnings of the arts of dancing, music and
poetry; and therefore in any study pretending to completeness it would
be necessary to discuss the difficult problem of the relation between
art, play and ceremonial in social life, a subject of too wide a scope
to be handled in such an essay as this. For our present purpose we are
concerned with the dance only as a form of social ceremonial.

If an Andaman Islander is asked why he dances he gives an answer that
amounts to saying that he does so because he enjoys it. Dancing is
therefore in general a means of enjoyment. It is frequently a
rejoicing. The Andaman Islanders dance after a successful day of
hunting; they do not dance if their day has been one of disappointment.

Pleasurable mental excitement finds its natural expression in bodily
activity, as we see most plainly in young children and in some animals.
And in its turn mere muscular activity is itself a source of pleasure.
The individual shouts and jumps for joy; the society turns the jump
into a dance, the shout into a song.

The essential character of all dancing is that it is rhythmical, and it
is fairly evident that the primary function of this rhythmical nature
of the dance is to enable a number of persons to join in the same
actions and perform them as one body. In the Andamans at any rate it is
clear that the spectacular dance (such as the performance described on
page 164) is a late development out of the common dance. And it is
probable that the history of the dance is everywhere the same, that it
began as a common dance in which all present take some active part, and
from this first form (still surviving in our ball-room dances) arose
the spectacular dance in which one or more dancers perform before
spectators who take no part themselves.

In the Andamans the song is an accompaniment of the dance. The dancing
and singing and the marking of the rhythm by clapping and by stamping
on the sounding-board are all parts of the one common action in which
all join and which for convenience is here spoken of as the dance. It
is probable that here again the Andamanese practice shows us the
earliest stage in the development of the song, that song and music at
first had no independent existence but together with dancing formed one
activity. It is reasonable to suppose that the song first came into
general use in human society because it provides a means by which a
number of persons can utter the same series of sounds together and as
with one voice, this being made possible by the fixed rhythm and the
fixed pitch of the whole song and of each part of it (i.e. by melody).
Once the art of song was in existence its further development was
doubtless largely dependent upon the esthetic pleasure that it is able
to give. But in the Andamans the esthetic pleasure that the natives get
from their simple and monotonous songs seems to me of quite secondary
importance as compared with the value of the song as a joint social
activity.

The movements of the ordinary Great Andaman dance do not seem to me to
be in themselves expressive, or at any rate they are not obviously
mimetic like the movements of the dances of many primitive folk. Their
function seems to be to bring into activity as many of the muscles of
the body as possible. The bending of the body at the hips and of the
legs at the knees, with the slightly backward poise of the head and the
common position of the arms held in line with the shoulders with the
elbows crooked and the thumb and first finger of each hand clasping
those of the other, produce a condition of tension of a great number of
the muscles of the trunk and limbs. The attitude is one in which all
the main joints of the body are between complete flexion and complete
extension so that there is approximately an equal tension in the
opposing groups of flexor and extensor muscles. Thus the whole body of
the dancer is full of active forces balanced one against another,
resulting in a condition of flexibility and alertness without strain.

While the dance thus brings into play the whole muscular system of the
dancer it also requires the activity of the two chief senses, that of
sight to guide the dancer in his movements amongst the others and that
of hearing to enable him to keep time with the music. Thus the dancer
is in a condition in which all the bodily and mental activities are
harmoniously directed to one end.

Finally, in order to understand the function of the Andamanese dance it
must be noted that every adult member of the community takes some part
in it. All the able-bodied men join in the dance itself; all the women
join in the chorus. If anyone through ill-health or old age is unable
to take any active part, he or she is at least necessarily a spectator,
for the dance takes place in the centre of the village in the open
space towards which the huts usually face [166].

The Andamanese dance (with its accompanying song) may therefore be
described as an activity in which, by virtue of the effects of rhythm
and melody, all the members of a community are able harmoniously to
cooperate and act in unity; which requires on the part of the dancer a
continual condition of tension free from strain; and which produces in
those taking part in it a high degree of pleasure. We must now proceed
to examine very briefly the chief effects on the mental condition of
those taking part [167].

First let us consider some of the effects of rhythm. Any marked rhythm
exercises over those submitted to its influence a constraint, impelling
them to yield to it and to permit it to direct and regulate the
movements of the body and even those of the mind. If one does not yield
to this constraining influence it produces a state of restlessness that
may become markedly unpleasant. One who yields himself utterly to it,
as does the dancer when he joins in the dance, still continues to feel
the constraint, but so far from being unpleasant it now produces a
pleasure of a quite distinct quality. The first point for us to note
therefore is that through the effect of rhythm the dance affords an
experience of a constraint or force of a peculiar kind acting upon the
individual and inducing in him when he yields himself to it a pleasure
of self-surrender. The peculiarity of the force in question is that it
seems to act upon the individual both from without (since it is the
sight of his friends dancing and the sound of the singing and marking
time that occasions it), and also from within (since the impulse to
yield himself to the constraining rhythm comes from his own organism).

A second effect of the rhythm of the dance is due to the well-known
fact that a series of actions performed rhythmically produces very much
less fatigue than actions not rhythmical requiring the same expenditure
of muscular energy. So the dancer feels that in and through the dance
he obtains such an increase of his personal energy that he is able to
accomplish strenuous exertions with a minimum of fatigue. This effect
of rhythm is reinforced by the excitement produced by the rapid
movements of the dancers, the loud sounds of the song and clapping and
sounding-board, and intensified, as all collective states of emotion
are intensified, by reason of being collective; with the result that
the Andaman Islanders are able to continue their strenuous dancing
through many hours of the night [168].

There is yet a third most important effect of rhythm. Recent psychology
shows that what are called the esthetic emotions are largely dependent
upon motor images. We call a form beautiful when, through the movements
of the eye in following it, we feel it as movement, and as movement of
a particular kind which we can only describe at present by using such a
word as ‘harmonious.’ Similarly our esthetic appreciation of music
seems to be largely dependent on our feeling the music as movement, the
sounds appealing not to the ear only but to stored-up unconscious motor
memories. With regard to dancing, our pleasure in watching the
graceful, rhythmical and harmonious movements of the dancer is an
esthetic pleasure of similar nature to that obtained from the
contemplation of beautiful shapes or listening to music. But when the
individual is himself dancing it does not seem quite fitting to call
his pleasure esthetic. Yet the dance, even the simple dance of the
Andamans, does make, in the dancer himself, partly by the effect of
rhythm, partly by the effect of the harmonious and balanced tension of
the muscles, a direct appeal to that motor sense to which the
contemplation of beautiful forms and movements makes only an indirect
appeal. In other words the dancer actually feels within himself that
harmonious action of balanced and directed forces which, in the
contemplation of a beautiful form we feel as though it were in the
object at which we look. Hence such dancing as that of the Andaman
Islanders may be looked upon as an early step in the training of the
esthetic sense, and to recognize all that the dance means we must make
allowance for this fact that the mental state of the dancer is closely
related to the mental state that we call esthetic enjoyment.

Let us now consider the effects of the dance as a social or collective
activity. First, the dance affords an opportunity for the individual to
exhibit before others his skill and agility and so to gratify his
personal vanity. It is very easy to observe the action of this harmless
vanity in the dancers, and particularly in the man who takes the place
at the sounding-board and acts as soloist or leader of the chorus. The
dancer seeks to feel, and does feel, that he is the object of the
approbation and admiration of his friends. His self-regarding
sentiments are pleasantly stimulated, so that he becomes conscious, in
a state of self-satisfaction and elation, of his own personal value.
This stimulation of the self-regarding sentiment is an important factor
in the total effect produced by the dance.

Secondly, the dance, at the same time that it stimulates pleasantly the
self-regarding sentiment, also affects the sentiments of the dancer
towards his fellows. The pleasure that the dancer feels irradiates
itself over everything around him and he is filled with geniality and
good-will towards his companions. The sharing with others of an intense
pleasure, or rather the sharing in a collective expression of pleasure,
must ever incline us to such expansive feelings. It is certainly a
readily observable fact that in the Andamans the dance does produce a
condition of warm good-fellowship in those taking part in it. There is
no need to enquire more closely into the mental mechanisms by which
this is brought about.

The Andaman dance, then, is a complete activity of the whole community,
in which every able-bodied adult takes some part, and is also an
activity in which, so far as the dancer himself is concerned, the whole
personality is involved, by the innervation of all the muscles of the
body, by the concentration of attention required, and by its action on
the personal sentiments. In the dance the individual submits to the
action upon him of the community; he is constrained, by the immediate
effect of rhythm as well as by custom, to join in, and he is required
to conform in his own actions and movements to the needs of the common
activity. The surrender of the individual to this constraint or
obligation is not felt as painful, but on the contrary as highly
pleasurable. As the dancer loses himself in the dance, as he becomes
absorbed in the unified community, he reaches a state of elation in
which he feels himself filled with energy or force immensely beyond his
ordinary state, and so finds himself able to perform prodigies of
exertion. This state of intoxication, as it might almost be called, is
accompanied by a pleasant stimulation of the self-regarding sentiment,
so that the dancer comes to feel a great increase in his personal force
and value. And at the same time, finding himself in complete and
ecstatic harmony with all the fellow-members of his community,
experiences a great increase in his feelings of amity and attachment
towards them.

In this way the dance produces a condition in which the unity, harmony
and concord of the community are at a maximum, and in which they are
intensely felt by every member. It is to produce this condition, I
would maintain, that is the primary social function of the dance. The
well-being, or indeed the existence, of the society depends on the
unity and harmony that obtain in it, and the dance, by making that
unity intensely felt, is a means of maintaining it. For the dance
affords an opportunity for the direct action of the community upon the
individual, and we have seen that it exercises in the individual those
sentiments by which the social harmony is maintained.

It was formerly the custom, I was told, always to have a dance before
setting out to a fight. The reason for this should now be clear. When a
group engages in a fight with another it is to revenge some injury that
has been done to the whole group. The group is to act as a group and
not merely as a collection of individuals, and it is therefore
necessary that the group should be conscious of its unity and
solidarity. Now we have seen that the chief function of the dance is to
arouse in the mind of every individual a sense of the unity of the
social group of which he is a member, and its function before setting
out to a fight is therefore apparent. A secondary effect of the dance
before a fight is to intensify the collective anger against the hostile
group, and thereby and in other ways to produce a state of excitement
and elation which has an important influence on the fighting quality of
the Andaman warrior.

An important feature of the social life of the Andamans in former times
was the dance-meetings that were regularly held and at which two or
more local groups met together for a few days. Each local group lived
for the greater part of the year comparatively isolated from others.
What little solidarity there was between neighbouring groups therefore
tended to become weakened. Social relations between two groups were for
the most part only kept up by visits of individuals from one group to
another, but such visits did not constitute a relation between group
and group. The function of the dance-meetings was therefore to bring
the two groups into contact and renew the social relations between them
and in that way to maintain the solidarity between them. Those
meetings, apart from the provision of the necessary food, were entirely
devoted to the exchange of presents and to dancing, the two or more
parties of men and women joining together every night in a dance. We
have already seen that the exchange of presents is a means of
expressing solidarity or mutual good-will. It is now clear that the
dance serves to unite the two or more groups into one body, and to make
that unity felt by every individual, so creating for a few days a
condition of close solidarity. The effects of the meeting would
gradually wear out as months went by, and therefore it was necessary to
repeat the meeting at suitable intervals.

Thus it appears that not only the ordinary dance, but also the
war-dance, and the dance-meetings owe their place in the life of the
Andaman Islanders to the fact that dancing is a means of uniting
individuals into a harmonious whole and at the same time making them
actually and intensely experience their relation to that unity of which
they are the members. The special dances at initiation ceremonies and
on other occasions will be dealt with later in the chapter, on the
basis of the general explanation given above.

On the occasion of a dance, particularly if it be a dance of some
importance, such as a war-dance, or a dance of two groups together, the
dancers decorate themselves by putting on various ornaments and by
painting their bodies with red paint and white clay. The explanation of
the dance cannot therefore be regarded as complete till we have
considered the meaning of this personal adornment connected with it.

If the Andaman Islander be asked why he adorns himself for the dance,
his reply is invariably that he wishes to look well, to improve his
personal appearance. In other words his conscious motive is personal
vanity.

One of the features of the dance, and a not unimportant one, is that it
offers an opportunity for the gratification of personal vanity. The
dancer, painted, and hung over with ornaments, becomes pleasantly
conscious of himself, of his own skill and agility, and of his striking
or at least satisfactory appearance, and so he becomes also conscious
of his relation to others, of their admiration, actual or possible, and
of the approval and good-will that go with admiration. In brief, the
ornamented dancer is pleasantly conscious of his own personal value. We
may therefore say that the most important function of any such adorning
of the body is to express or mark the personal value of the decorated
individual.

This explanation only applies to certain bodily ornaments and to
certain ways of painting the body. It applies to the painting of white
clay, with or without red paint, that is adopted at dances and on other
ceremonial occasions. It applies to such personal ornaments as those
made of netting and Dentalium shell which constitute what may be called
the ceremonial costume of the Andamanese. It is of these that the
natives say that they use them in order to look well.

The occasions on which such personal decoration is used are strictly
defined by custom. In other words the society dictates to the
individual when and how he shall be permitted to express his own
personal value. It is obvious that personal vanity is of great
importance in directing the conduct of the individual in his dealings
with his fellows, and much more amongst a primitive people such as the
Andamanese than amongst ourselves, and it is therefore necessary that
the society should have some means of controlling the sentiment and
directing it towards social ends. We have seen that the dance is the
expression of the unity and harmony of the society, and by permitting
at the dance the free expression of personal vanity the society ensures
that the individual shall learn to feel, even if only subconsciously,
that his personal value depends upon the harmony between himself and
his fellows.

The bride and bridegroom are painted with white clay, and wear
ornaments of Dentalium shell on the day following their marriage. We
have seen that marriage involves a change of social status, and we may
say that it gives an increased social value to the married pair, the
social position of a married man or woman being of greater importance
and dignity than that of a bachelor or spinster. They are, after
marriage, the objects of higher regard on the part of their fellows
than they were before. It is therefore appropriate that the personal
value of the bride and bridegroom should be expressed so that both they
themselves and their fellows should have their attention drawn to it,
and this is clearly the function of the painting and ornaments.

After the completion of any of the more important of the initiation
ceremonies, such as the eating of turtle, the initiate is painted with
white clay and red paint and wears ornaments of Dentalium shell. This
is exactly parallel to the painting of the bride and bridegroom. The
initiate, by reason of the ceremony he has been through, has acquired
new dignity and importance, and by having fulfilled the requirements of
custom has deserved the approval of his fellows. The decoration of his
body after the ceremony is thus the expression of his increased social
value.

A corpse, before burial, is decorated in the same manner as the body of
a dancer. This, we may take it, is the means by which the surviving
relatives and friends express their regard for the dead, i.e. their
sense of his value. We need not suppose that they believe the dead man
to be conscious of what they are doing. It is to satisfy themselves
that they decorate the corpse, not to satisfy the spirit. When a man is
painted he feels that he has the regard and good-will of his fellows,
and those who see him, at any rate in the instance of a bridegroom or
initiate, realise that he has deserved their regard. So, to express
their regard for the dead man they paint the inanimate body. Hence it
is that the greater the esteem in which the dead man or woman is held,
the greater is the care bestowed on the last painting.

We may conclude therefore that the painting of the body with white clay
and the wearing of ornaments of Dentalium shell is a rite or ceremony
by which the value of the individual to the society is expressed on
appropriate occasions. We shall find confirmation of this later in the
chapter.

Before passing on to consider the meaning of other methods of
decorating the body there is one matter that is worthy of mention. It
is often assumed or stated that both personal ornament and dancing,
amongst uncivilised peoples, are connected with sexual emotion. It is,
of course, extremely difficult to disprove a statement of this sort. So
far as the Andamanese are concerned I was unable to find any trace
whatever of a definitely sexual element in either their dances or their
personal adornment. It may be recalled that both men and women wear
exactly the same ornaments on ceremonial occasions, and this is to some
extent evidence that such have no sexual value. It is possible that
some observers might see in the dance of the women (which is only
performed on rare occasions) a suggestion of something of a sexual
nature. I was unable to find that the natives themselves consider that
there is anything suggestive of sex in either the dance of the men or
that of the women. If it were true that the most important feature of
the dance was that it appealed in some way to sexual feelings it is
difficult to see how we are to explain the different occasions on which
dancing takes place, as before a fight, at the end of mourning, etc.,
whereas these are adequately accounted for by the hypothesis that the
dance is a method of expressing the unity and harmony of the society.
Similarly the explanation of personal ornament as being connected with
sexual feeling would fail to account for the occasions on which it is
regarded as obligatory. There is therefore, I believe, no special
connection between the dancing and personal ornament of the Andamanese
and sexual feeling. It would still be possible to hold that there is a
general connection of great importance between the affective
dispositions underlying these and other customs and the complex
affective disposition that we call the sex instinct. The nature of that
connection, important as it is, lies outside the scope of this work.

I remarked above that the explanation which I have given of the meaning
of personal ornament does not apply to all the objects that the Andaman
Islanders wear on their body, but only to certain of them. If an
Andaman Islander be asked why he paints himself with white clay, or why
he wears a belt or necklace of Dentalium shell he replies that he does
so in order to look well; but if he be asked why he wears a string of
human bones round his head or neck or waist, he gives quite a different
answer, to the effect that he does so in order to protect himself from
dangers of a special kind. According to circumstances he will say
either that he is wearing the bones to cure himself of illness, or else
that he wears them as a protection against spirits. Thus while some
things are worn on the body in order to improve the personal
appearance, and consequently, as explained above, to give the
individual a sense of his own value, others are worn because they are
believed to have a protective power, and thereby arouse in the person a
sense of security. Exactly the same sort of protective power is
attributed to things that cannot be worn on the body, such as fire, and
it will therefore be convenient to consider together all the things
that afford this kind of protection, whether they can be worn on the
body or not.

The interpretation here offered is that the customs connected with this
belief in the protective power of objects of various kinds are means by
which is expressed and thereby maintained at the necessary degree of
energy a very important social sentiment, which, for lack of a better
term, I shall call the sentiment of dependence. In such a primitive
society as that of the Andamans one of the most powerful means of
maintaining the cohesion of the society and of enforcing that
conformity to custom and tradition without which social life is
impossible, is the recognition by the individual that for his security
and well-being he depends entirely upon the society. Now for the
Andaman Islander the society is not sufficiently concrete and
particular to act as the object of such a sentiment, and he therefore
feels his dependence upon the society not directly but in a number of
indirect ways. The particular way with which we are now concerned is
that the individual experiences this feeling of dependence towards
every important possession of the society, towards every object which
for the society has constant and important uses.

The most prominent example of such an object is fire. It may be said to
be the one object on which the society most of all depends for its
well-being. It provides warmth on cold nights; it is the means whereby
they prepare their food, for they eat nothing raw save a few fruits; it
is a possession that has to be constantly guarded, for they have no
means of producing it, and must therefore take care to keep it always
alight; it is the first thing they think of carrying with them when
they go on a journey by land or sea; it is the centre around which the
social life moves, the family hearth being the centre of the family
life, while the communal cooking place is the centre round which the
men often gather after the day’s hunting is over. To the mind of the
Andaman Islander, therefore, the social life of which his own life is a
fragment, the social well-being which is the source of his own
happiness, depend upon the possession of fire, without which the
society could not exist. In this way it comes about that his dependence
on the society appears in his consciousness as a sense of dependence
upon fire and a belief that it possesses power to protect him from
dangers of all kinds.

The belief in the protective power of fire is very strong. A man would
never move even a few yards out of camp at night without a fire-stick.
More than any other object fire is believed to keep away the spirits
that cause disease and death. This belief, it is here maintained, is
one of the ways in which the individual is made to feel his dependence
upon the society.

Now this hypothesis is capable of being very strictly tested by the
facts, for if it is true we must expect to find that the same
protective power is attributed to every object on which the social life
depends. An examination of the Andamanese beliefs shows that this is
so, and thereby confirms the hypothesis.

In their daily life the Andamanese depend on the intrinsic qualities of
the materials they use for their bows and arrows and harpoons and other
hunting implements, and it can be shown that they do attribute to these
implements and to the materials from which they are made powers of
protection against evil. Moreover it is even possible to apply a
quantitative test and show that the more important the place a thing
occupies in the social life the greater is the degree of protective
power attributed to it. Finally I shall be able to show that as
different materials are used for special purposes so they are supposed
to have certain special powers of protection against certain sorts of
danger. Thus the hypothesis I have stated is capable of being as nearly
demonstrated as is possible in such psychological enquiries as the one
we are engaged in.

A man carrying his bow and arrows is supposed to be less likely to fall
a victim to the spirits than one who has no weapons with him. One way
of stopping a violent storm is to go into the sea (storms being
supposed to be due to the spirits of the sea) and swish the water about
with arrows. The natives sometimes wear a necklace formed of short
lengths of the bamboo shaft of a fish-arrow. All the examples of such
necklaces that I met with had been made from an old arrow. I asked a
native to make one for me, and although he could readily have made one
from bamboo that had never served as an arrow he did not do so, but
used the shaft of one of his arrows. Such a necklace may therefore be
described as an arrow in such a form that it can be worn round the neck
and thus carried continually without trouble. The protective power of
the bow is at first sight not quite so evident, but the material used
for the string is regarded as possessing protective power, and to this
I shall return shortly.

The best demonstration of the truth of the explanation offered is to be
found by considering the different vegetable fibres of which use is
made. The most important of these are the Anadendron paniculatum (used
for bow-strings and for fine string), the Hibiscus tiliaceus (used for
rope) and the Gnetum edule (used for string, and inferior to the
Anadendron). All these fibres are believed to possess power to keep
away dangers, but there is a sort of specialisation in their use.

The fibre of the Hibiscus is used mainly in the hunting of turtle and
big fish. Consequently the tree itself from which the fibre is obtained
is believed to possess the power of warding off all dangers connected
with turtle and the sea. There is a custom that turtle flesh may only
be cooked with wood of the Hibiscus, otherwise it will be uneatable. In
the turtle-eating ceremony the initiate who, as we shall see later, is
in a condition of danger by reason of having eaten turtle for the first
time after a period of abstention, is seated on Hibiscus leaves and
holds a bundle of the same leaves before him. At the same ceremony the
leaves of this tree are used in the dance, and the initiate is given a
skewer made from its wood with which to feed himself. If for any reason
the leaves of the Hibiscus are not obtainable when the ceremony is
performed those of the Myristica longifolia are used instead. Now this
is the tree from which the natives always make their canoe paddles,
which, like ropes of Hibiscus fibre, are used in hunting turtle. This
specialisation is therefore easy to understand; the natives habitually
make use of the Hibiscus and the Myristica in turtle-hunting; they use
the intrinsic qualities of these trees in their actual struggles with
turtle and large fish, and by means of these qualities they are able to
succeed in overcoming their prey; they therefore come to believe that
these trees possess special powers which not only enable them to
conquer the turtle itself but also are able to protect them from the
evil influences that they believe (for reasons to be explained later)
result from the eating of its flesh.

This explanation is readily verified by considering an exactly parallel
instance. In the pig-eating ceremony at initiation the leaves of the
Hibiscus or the Myristica are not used, and are regarded as valueless.
Paddles and ropes are of no use in hunting pigs. The leaves that are
used in this ceremony are those of the Tetranthera lancæfolia. It is
from this tree that are obtained the shafts of pig-arrows. Hence the
relation of the tree to the pig is exactly parallel to that of the
Hibiscus to turtle. It is by making use of the qualities of the wood
that they are able to destroy the pig and so they believe that its
leaves will enable them to destroy the dangers that result from the
eating of the animal.

The leaves of the Tetranthera are also used, however, in the ceremony
at a girl’s first menstruation, and I cannot pass over this without an
explanation. It is to be found in the fact that pig-arrows are used in
fighting, so that the tree comes to have a special relation to the
shedding of blood. Plumes of shredded Tetranthera wood (made from an
old arrow-shaft) must be worn by a homicide during the period of
“purification” as a protection against the dangers that are believed to
threaten him because he has shed blood. The same plumes were formerly
always carried in a dance preceding a fight, and at such times the
natives used to rub their bows with the shredded wood in order to
ensure success in battle. Thus it is clear that there is a special
connection between this tree and the shedding of blood, due to the fact
that pig-arrows, of which the shafts are made from it, are used in
fighting as well as for killing pigs and other animals. It is probable
that this is the explanation of the use of the leaves during the
ceremony at a girl’s first menstruation.

These examples afford a crucial test of the hypothesis here maintained.
Not only is the protective power of these substances explicable by the
fact that they are things on which the society depends in its daily
life, but the special uses of each of them as amulets are only
explicable when we consider the different uses to which they are put as
materials.

The fibre of the Anadendron paniculatum is used for making thread,
bow-strings, the cords of pig-arrows, and for binding the heads and
barbs of harpoons and arrows. It has therefore no special relation to
either pig or turtle. There is a belief, however, that the plant does
possess special protective powers that make it efficacious against
certain dangers coming from the sea. A piece of the plant tied round
the neck or worn in the belt of a swimmer is believed to protect him
from sharks and other dangerous fish. A piece of it crushed and placed
in the sea is said to have stopped a violent storm on one occasion.
Thus the Anadendron seems to possess a special power which makes it a
source of protection against dangers from the sea. The same is true of
the Gnetum edule, though, as this fibre is less valued than that of the
Anadendron, it is not supposed to be so powerful in its effects. In
regard to the specialisation in the use of these two plants as amulets
it seems likely that it is due to a notion of opposition between the
things of the forest and the things of the sea. The Andamanese live in
a double environment; the jungle-dwellers live entirely in the forest
and have dealings with forest things; they develop knowledge and powers
that make them better woodsmen than the coast-dwellers. The latter live
by the sea and are chiefly occupied with things of the sea, being
skilled in the occupations of fishing and canoeing. There is thus a
contrast or opposition between the life of the forest and the life of
the shore that runs through all the social life, and I believe that it
is this opposition which explains the belief that the Anadendron and
the Gnetum, which are essentially forest things, are possessed of a
quality that makes them contrary or opposed to all things of the sea.

Personal ornaments are made from the fibres that have been mentioned
(Hibiscus, Anadendron, Gnetum), and we are justified, I think, in
regarding such ornaments as being to some extent amulets. I purchased
from a man in the Little Andaman a charm that was hanging round his
neck, which he seemed to value highly. I imagined that it might contain
a human bone, but when I had unwound the ornamental thread with which
it was bound and opened out the covering of bark I found inside the
parcel only a carefully folded length of rope made from Hibiscus fibre.

There is one fibre from which the natives of the Great Andaman make
themselves ornaments, which they do not regularly use in any other way,
namely that of the Ficus laccifera. We may perhaps regard this as a
genuine and demonstrable example of a survival in custom. The natives
of the Little Andaman, who, until their recent contact with those of
the Great Andaman, did not know the use of the Anadendron, use the
fibre of the Ficus for their bow-strings. We are justified in assuming,
I believe, that the natives of the Great Andaman made a similar use of
the same fibre before they had learnt to use the Anadendron. In those
days much of the power that is now attributed to the Anadendron,
because of its service as the material for bow-strings, must then have
been attributed to the Ficus. When the substitution of the superior
Anadendron fibre came about, the belief in the efficacy of the Ficus
did not disappear, although the ground of the belief (if we may call it
so) had ceased to exist. If this be so, then the present use of the
Ficus fibre as an amulet is an example of survival. It may be noted
that the qualities of the Ficus are supposed to be similar to those of
the Anadendron. Thus while one medicine-man stopped a storm with
Anadendron, another did the same thing on another occasion with Ficus.

The above examples are sufficient to justify the generalisation that
the Andamanese attribute protective power to all those substances on
the strength and other qualities of which they rely in order to obtain
their food or overcome their enemies. There are one or two other
positive instances that have not been mentioned. Bees’-wax, which is
used for waxing thread and bow-strings, is believed to have power to
keep spirits away and to cure sickness. Cane, which is used by the
natives for many different purposes, seems also to have its use as an
amulet, for belts and other personal ornaments are made of pieces of
cane attached to a length of rope.

Negative instances are more difficult to discover. When I was in the
Andamans I had not formulated the explanation that is offered here, and
I therefore did not make any search for negative instances that might
have afforded a means of testing the value of the hypothesis. I have no
satisfactory evidence that protective power is attributed to iron, or
to the shells that were formerly used, as iron now is, for the heads
and barbs of arrows, but it is quite possible that I may have
overlooked evidence that was really there. I do not think that any
particular protective properties are attributed to such things as the
materials from which baskets are made and the clay that is used for
pottery. These things, however, may be regarded as luxuries rather than
necessities; they are not of the same immediate service to the society
in its fundamental activity (that of providing food) as are weapons and
the materials used in them.

There are still two important kinds of amulets that remain to be
considered. First, protective power is attributed to the bones of
animals, which are made into personal ornaments; these cannot be dealt
with until we have considered some of the beliefs relating to food.
Secondly, a very high degree of protective power is attributed to human
bones, but the discussion of this belief must wait till we have
discovered the meaning of the funeral customs of the Andamanese.

To conclude the present argument, it would seem that the function of
the belief in the protective power of such things as fire and the
materials from which weapons are made is to maintain in the mind of the
individual the feeling of his dependence upon the society; but viewed
from another aspect the beliefs in question may be regarded as
expressing the social value of the things to which they relate. This
term—social value—will be used repeatedly in the later part of this
chapter, and it is therefore necessary to give an exact definition. By
the social value of anything I mean the way in which that thing affects
or is capable of affecting the social life. Value may be either
positive or negative, positive value being possessed by any thing that
contributes to the well-being of the society, negative value by
anything that can adversely affect that well-being.

The social value of a thing (such as fire) is a matter of immediate
experience to every member of the society, but the individual does not
of necessity consciously and directly realise that value. He is made to
realise it indirectly through the belief, impressed upon him by
tradition, that the thing in question affords protection against
danger. A belief or sentiment which finds regular outlet in action is a
very different thing from a belief which rarely or never influences
conduct. Thus, though the Andaman Islander might have a vague
realisation of the value of Hibiscus, for example, that would be
something very different from the result on the mind of the individual
of the regular use of the leaves of that tree in initiation ceremonies
as a protection against unseen dangers. So that the protective uses of
such things are really rites or ceremonies by means of which the
individual is made to realise (1) his own dependence on the society and
its possessions, and (2) the social value of the things in question.

I have had to postpone to the later parts of the chapter the
consideration of some of the objects possessing protective power, but I
venture to state here three propositions some part of the evidence for
which has already been examined, and which will be sufficiently
demonstrated, I hope, before the end of the chapter. They are as
follows: (1) any object that contributes to the well-being of the
society is believed to afford protection against evil; (2) the degree
of protective power it is believed to possess depends on the importance
of the services it actually renders to the society; (3) the kind of
special protection it is supposed to afford is often related to the
kind of special service that it does actually render.

We were led to the consideration of the protective power of objects
through an attempt to understand the meaning of the methods of
ornamenting the body in the Andamans. We have seen that some ornaments
are worn in order to express the personal value of the individual,
while others are worn for the sake of the protection they are believed
to afford. We have also seen that one method of painting the body (with
white clay) is a means of expressing the personal value of the painted
individual. We will next consider the use of the clay called odu. This
clay is painted on the body of a mourner and is the outward sign of
mourning; it is used at certain stages of the initiation ceremonies; it
is also regularly used for painting the body with the designs known as
e̱ra-puli. According to the rule of method laid down at the beginning of
the chapter we must seek some common explanation of these different
uses of the same substance.

We may consider, first of all, the patterns (e̱ra-puli) that are made
with this clay on the body and face after eating certain foods such as
pork and turtle.

Mr Man gives two explanations of the use of these paintings of clay.
During the hot season, he says, the natives “endeavour to lessen the
discomfort caused by the heat by smearing their bodies with a
white-wash of common white clay and water.” He adds: “it has long been
erroneously believed that they have recourse to this expedient in order
to allay the inconvenience which they would otherwise suffer from the
bites of mosquitoes and other jungle pests; but the true reason for the
practice is, I am well assured, that which I have given above [169].”
In another place he says: “After eating pork or turtle they are in the
habit of smearing og over their bodies with their fingers, in the
belief that it affects their breath, and that evil spirits will be
unable to detect, and therefore will not be attracted to, them by the
savoury smell of the food of which they have partaken. Again, when
heated by travelling or by hunting or dancing, they have recourse to
the same wash, but in these cases it is applied thinly [170].”

There are here two explanations of fundamentally different character.
First the Andamanese practice of painting their bodies with clay is
explained as having a purely utilitarian purpose, being intended to
cool them when they are heated. In the second statement the explanation
given is that the custom is intended to protect them from danger.

My own observations do not altogether agree with the statements of Mr
Man. I found that the natives painted themselves just as much in the
cold season as in the hot season. The principal, if not the sole,
occasion on which the clay is used is after or immediately before a
meal, and therefore generally in the late afternoon or evening when the
heat of the day is past. I do not feel so satisfied as Mr Man appears
to be, that the clay really has the effect of keeping a person cool,
particularly when it is remembered that the painting may consist of a
few lines each as broad as a finger. Moreover, Mr Man’s explanation
does not afford any reason for the fact that the clay is always applied
in some sort of pattern. If it were merely to keep himself cool, we
should expect to see a man cover himself all over with a plain coating
evenly spread over the body. Such an even coating is never used, in the
Great Andaman tribes, except by persons mourning for the dead, and is
the essential mark of a mourner.

It is easy to explain how Mr Man has fallen into an error in this
matter. On many occasions, when I questioned the natives as to their
reason for painting themselves with clay I received the answer, “When
we have eaten pork or turtle or dugong, we become ot-kimil and so we
take clay and paint ourselves.” Now the word ot-kimil in the Aka-J̌eru
language is the word that the natives use to express what we mean by
the word “hot.” But while “hot” may always be translated by ot-kimil or
er-kimil, the latter word cannot always be adequately rendered in
English by the word “hot.” Mr Man seems to have supposed that when an
Andaman Islander says “hot” he means by the word only what we mean,
whereas he really means a great deal more.

Let us examine briefly the word in question. In the languages of the
North Andaman the stem is -kimil. With the prefix ot- or er- it is used
to mean “hot” as in T’ot-kimil-bom, “I am hot,” or Ino ot-kimil bi or
Ino er-kimil bi, “The water is hot.” Used by itself the stem kimil is
the name of the latter part of the rainy season, when the weather is
not hot but cool. A youth or girl who is passing through the initiation
ceremonies is said to be aka-kimil, and is addressed or spoken of as
Kimil, instead of by his or her proper name. The turtle-eating ceremony
is called čokbi-kimil, or čokbi-ǰo or kimil-ǰo, čokbi meaning “turtle”
and ǰo meaning “eating.” The word “hot” is used by the natives in
several unusual ways when they are talking their own language or
Hindustani. Thus a stormy or rough sea is said to be “hot,” and one
native in describing to me (in Hindustani) the cessation of a cyclone
said “the sea became cold.” A person who is ill is said to be hot, and
getting well is expressed by the phrase “getting cool.”

In the Aka-Bea language the word “hot” is translated by Mr Portman by
the stem uya. The stem kimil appears in the form gumul in only some of
the uses it has in the Northern languages. Gumul is the name of the
latter part of the rainy season. A youth passing through the initiation
ceremonies is said to be aka-gumul and is addressed or spoken of as
Guma. The turtle-eating ceremony is called gumul-le-ke, le-ke meaning
“eating.” The word thus means “the gumul eating” and is the literal
equivalent of the kimil-ǰo of the North.

The uses of the word kimil may be summarised as follows:

(1) to mean “hot” in the sense of the English word;

(2) in connection with illness;

(3) in speaking of stormy weather;

(4) as the name of the latter part of the rainy season;

(5) to denote the condition of a youth or girl who is passing through
or has recently passed through the initiation ceremonies, and to denote
the ceremonies themselves;

(6) to denote a condition in a person consequent on eating certain
foods, and perhaps sometimes due to other causes, to remedy or obviate
which the natives make use of clay painted in patterns on their bodies.

It is probable, then, that when a native says that after eating food he
is ot-kimil and therefore paints himself with clay he does not mean
simply that he is hot. This will be still more evident when we consider
the second explanation of the custom that is given by the natives. Many
of those whom I questioned stated that after eating dugong, pork,
turtle, etc., the body emits an odour, that this odour may attract the
spirits of the jungle or the sea, and that to obviate this they paint
themselves with clay. This agrees exactly with what Mr Man says in the
second passage quoted above. It is confirmed by other customs. I was
told that a man who has eaten dugong will not leave the camp until some
time after the dugong meat is all finished, for fear that the spirits
may smell him and do him harm. It is to be noted in passing that
painting the body with clay does not by any means remove the odour that
does actually characterise a native after he has been eating fat meat
of any kind. We must be careful, in this instance also, not to assume
that an Andaman Islander means by “smell” exactly what we mean by it
and nothing more. It will be shown later in the chapter that the
Andamanese identify the smell of an object with its active magical
principle. One example may be given here to show this. The origin of
rheumatism in the legs is explained by the natives as being the result
of the common practice of preparing the fibre of the Anadendron
paniculatum by scraping it on the thigh. During this process, they say,
the “smell” of the plant enters the thigh and is the cause of rheumatic
or sciatic pains.

The natives give yet a third statement of their reasons for using clay.
On many occasions I asked them what would happen if they ate pork or
turtle and did not paint themselves. In every case I received the reply
that any man who did such a thing would almost certainly be ill.

When a number of persons give three different reasons for one and the
same action, and are equally sincere throughout, it is to be presumed
that the three different statements are so many different ways of
saying one and the same thing. We may therefore conclude that the
Andaman Islanders believe that there is a peculiar power in foods (or
in some foods) which makes it dangerous to eat them. This danger may be
expressed by saying that the person who has eaten food will, unless he
takes certain precautions, be liable to be ill. Now sickness is
believed to be caused by the spirits of the jungle and the sea, and
therefore an alternative or equivalent statement of the same belief is
that after a person has eaten food he is in danger from the spirits. We
may therefore conclude that the word ot-kimil, when it is used to
describe the condition of a person who has eaten food, denotes simply
this condition of danger, and nothing more. For this we shall find
ample confirmation later on. Subject to such later confirmation I will
here state what has been maintained, which is (1) that the e̱ra-puli
patterns are to be explained as being protective, (2) that the eating
of food is regarded as dangerous, and (3) that this danger is
associated in the minds of the natives with sickness and with the
spirits. It will be convenient to leave the first of these three
propositions for later discussion and take up the second, seeking to
find the meaning of this belief in the dangerous properties of food.

Not all foods are equally dangerous. I was able to establish roughly a
sort of scale. The most dangerous foods are dugong; the fish called
komar; some of the snakes; the internal fat such as the kidney-fat or
the intestinal fat of pig, turtle, monitor lizard and Paradoxurus; the
liver of sharks, sting-rays and Plotosus; and honey. Next in order come
the flesh of pigs, turtle, monitor lizard and Paradoxurus and of the
fishes mentioned above; also the eggs of turtle. To these should
perhaps be added the edible grubs and some vegetable foods such as the
yams and the Artocarpus fruit and seed. Lowest in the scale, that is,
least dangerous, are molluscs and the commoner sorts of fish and
vegetable foods.

The principles underlying this grading of foods are two. Those foods
that are difficult or dangerous to procure are considered more
dangerous than others. Thus all the fishes that are thought most
dangerous to eat are actually dangerous, such as the sharks, the
sting-rays, the armed Plotosus, and the fish komar that has a powerful
spike on its head with which it can inflict a dangerous wound. Secondly
the foods that are most prized are regarded as being more dangerous
than those that are less prized. The internal fat of animals is
regarded as a great delicacy and therefore occupies a high place in the
scale. It is this also that explains the position of honey and of the
edible grubs. The dugong, which is of all foods the most difficult and
dangerous to procure, and is at the same time more highly prized than
any other, is regarded as more dangerous to eat than any other.

It is this difference in the danger attributed to different foods that
gives the clue to the explanation of the beliefs relating to them. The
hypothesis I wish to put forward is that the custom of painting the
body after eating food is an expression of the social value of food.

In a simple community such as that of the Andaman Islands, in which the
necessary food has to be provided from day to day, food occupies a
predominant position, and is the chief source of those variations or
oscillations between conditions of euphoria and dysphoria that
constitute the emotional life of the society. Food is obtainable only
by the expenditure of effort, and the effort is a communal one. The
obtaining of food is the principal social activity and it is an
activity in which every able-bodied member of the community is required
by custom to join. A man’s first duty to the society may be defined as
the duty of providing food for himself and others, and no one is looked
on with more contempt than one who is lazy or careless in this respect.
On the contrary the man who stands highest in the esteem of others is
the skilful hunter who is generous in distributing to others the food
he obtains. The food provides the community with its chief joys and
sorrows. When food is scarce the whole community suffers. The men spend
all their time in hunting but are disappointed. They have to fall back
upon foods that are little relished, such as the commoner kinds of
molluscs. On the contrary when there is plenty of food the whole
society rejoices together. Every one has as much as he or she can eat.
Hunting and fishing become pleasant sports instead of arduous labour.

Viewing the matter from its relation to the feelings of the individual
we may say that it is particularly in connection with food that he is
made to feel that he is a member of the community, sharing with others
their joys and sorrows, taking part in a common activity, often
dependent upon others for the satisfaction of his hunger, and obliged
by custom to share with those others what he himself obtains. Thus food
is, for the Andaman Islander, the one object above all others that
serves to awaken in him day after day the feeling of his relation to
his fellows. It is also the source of a very large proportion of his
joys and sorrows, his excitements and disappointments. Thus it is that
when the natives wish to amuse each other it is by tales of hunting
that they do so, and a large proportion of their songs relate to the
getting of food.

It is thus clear that food becomes an important secondary object of the
fundamental affective dispositions that regulate the emotional attitude
of the individual to the society to which he belongs. It is connected
very closely with the feeling of moral obligation; the most valued
moral qualities in the Andaman Islands are energy in providing food and
generosity in distributing it; among the worst faults are laziness in
hunting and meanness in giving to others. Similarly food is closely
associated with the feeling of dependence. During childhood,
particularly, the individual has to depend on others for his food; even
later in life the food that a man eats is more often provided by others
than by himself; he depends on the community even for his daily
nourishment.

Different foods have different social values. Thus a dugong provides a
large supply of a highly-prized delicacy, but on the other hand can
only be obtained by strenuous and dangerous efforts of skilful hunters.
At the other end of the scale the social value of shell-fish is very
little. They are not relished and are only eaten when there is nothing
better, while the labour of obtaining them is simply one of drudgery
requiring little skill.

Finally it must be pointed out that the value of food is both positive
and negative. It is the source of conditions of social euphoria when it
is plentiful; while it is equally the source of social dysphoria when
it is lacking. In other words, on different occasions it is the source
of both pleasurable and painful states of the fundamental social
sentiments.

All these experiences connected with food organise themselves around
the notion that foods, or the animals that are used for food, are
things to be treated carefully, with respect, or, in other words, with
ritual precautions. The sense of the social value of food reveals
itself as a belief that food may be a source of danger unless it is
approached with circumspection, and this belief, translated into
action, gives rise to the rite of painting the body after eating. This
does not mean that when the Andaman Islander eats turtle he is actually
in a state of fear; he feels that he would have reason to be afraid if
it were not that the society has provided him with a means of avoiding
the dangers of turtle eating. What he does feel, then, as I have tried
to show, is not a fear of food but a sense of the value of food.

This interpretation will, I hope, be amply justified later, and the
psychological processes assumed by it will be further illustrated. One
point needs to be emphasised here, namely that the suggested
interpretation affords, as no other would seem to do, an explanation of
the fact that some foods are believed to be more dangerous than others,
and that while it is obligatory to paint the body after eating the more
dangerous foods, it is not necessary to do so after eating those that
are less dangerous. If the rite is simply the expression of the social
value of foods, it will follow that different food substances, having
different social values, must be subject to differences in ritual
treatment.

There are a few other customs connected with food, recorded in an
earlier chapter, which show that in general food is regarded as
something that may only be approached with ritual precautions. A turtle
must be killed with its head towards the open sea, and must be cut up
in one particular way, otherwise the meat would be “bad.” A pig must
also be cut up in a particular way, and must be stuffed with certain
leaves before it is roasted. A man will not eat certain foods when he
is away from his own country, as he is afraid that to do so might make
him ill. (This corresponds to the belief that there is less chance of
illness in one’s own country than away from it, and that the spirits of
a strange place are more dangerous than those that haunt the jungles
and the waters of a man’s own home.) All these customs, I believe, are
so many different expressions of the social value of food.

I have maintained earlier in the chapter that the sense of the social
value of such things as fire and the materials used for weapons
translates itself into the belief that these things afford protection
against danger. This would seem, at first sight, to be contradicted by
the explanation that I have just given of the belief in the danger of
food. The apparent contradiction must be faced and resolved before we
can proceed further.

First, it can be shown that the various things that are regarded as
affording protection when used according to custom, are also believed
to be dangerous, just in the same way that food is dangerous. One
example of this will suffice. The fibre of the Anadendron paniculatum,
which is used for bow-strings and other purposes, has been shown to
possess a power which gives it efficacy against dangers of the sea such
as sharks. This same power, however, may have injurious effects if the
plant is handled without proper precautions. Thus, if a piece of the
green creeper, or a person who has recently been handling it, should be
in a canoe, it would be impossible to capture turtle from that canoe,
as they would be driven away by the “smell” of the plant. If a piece of
the creeper were burnt in the fire there would be a great storm,
according to one statement, or all the turtle would be driven away from
the vicinity, according to another. The handling of the plant in the
preparation of the fibre, by scraping it on the thigh, is believed to
be the cause of rheumatism. Turtle meat that might by accident come in
contact with the plant would be dangerous and would therefore not be
eaten. These different beliefs show us that while this plant possesses
powers that make it of service to the society, both directly as a
material for weapons, and indirectly as a magical protection against
evil, it is also dangerous, i.e. it will produce undesirable effects
unless treated with the proper ritual precautions.

Now just as materials such as the Anadendron are dangerous but may yet
be used protectively, so it can be shown that the things used for food
are also capable of affording protection against evil. It may be
recalled that an important element of the treatment of sickness is by
the use of special foods. Yams, honey, the fat of turtle and dugong and
other foods are believed to possess curative properties. The flesh of
the flying-fox is used as a remedy for rheumatism. But the clearest
evidence is provided by the custom of wearing ornaments made of the
bones of animals that have been eaten. These ornaments are believed to
possess protective powers of the same kind as those attributed to human
bones, but they are considered to be more particularly of value to the
hunter when he is in the forest or on the sea. They are made chiefly
from the bones of those animals that are believed to be most dangerous
to eat. These animals are difficult and often dangerous to capture or
kill. When obtained they become very important sources of well-being to
the society. The Andamanese express their sense of the social value of
these animals in the belief that it is necessary to adopt certain
measures of ritual precaution in dealing with them. When these due
precautions are taken, however, then the society is able to make use of
the flesh to serve its own ends. So, when an animal has been eaten, and
has thus been made to serve as a source of advantage, of strength, the
bones, which are the permanent remains of the feast, acquire a symbolic
value as evidence of past social well-being, and omens of future
security. They are a visible proof of the ability of the society to
protect itself and its members from the dangers that are believed to
threaten the human being in the most important activity of his life,
the obtaining and eating of food.

Formerly the Andamanese preserved the skulls of all large animals such
as pigs, turtle and dugong. At the present day they no longer preserve
the skulls of pigs, giving as their reason that owing to the dogs
obtained from Europeans they now have little difficulty in killing
pigs; but they still preserve the skulls of dugongs, and a fair
proportion of the skulls of turtle. The J̌a̤rawa still seem to preserve
with great care the skulls of all the pigs they kill, going to the
pains of enclosing each one in a case of basket-work. These skulls, we
must conclude, are more than mere trophies of the chase. As visible
proofs of the ability of the society in the past to overcome the
hostile powers of nature, they form, as it were, the guarantee of a
similar ability in the future, and I believe that their preservation is
regarded as a means of ensuring success in hunting as well as
protection for the hunters. The turtle skulls that are often suspended
under the forward platform of a canoe, are, I believe, intended both to
protect the occupants of the canoe from the dangers of the sea and to
help them to obtain a good catch.

The Andamanese belief in the power of the bones of animals to protect
them from danger and to bring them luck, is therefore very similar to
their belief in the protective power of the materials used for weapons
and implements. The consideration of the apparent contradiction
mentioned above has led us to a more exact statement of the real
beliefs in these matters. They believe, we may say, that all the things
from the jungle and the sea of which they make use as food or as
materials, are dangerous unless approached with proper ritual
precautions, but when so approached they become sources of strength and
well-being and also of protection from unseen dangers.

To return to the main argument, which was concerned with the meaning of
the patterns of clay painted on the body after eating the more
dangerous foods, it would seem that this action is really a rite or
ceremony, of the same general character as other ceremonial customs of
the Andamans. It is an action required by custom, the performance of
which on appropriate occasions serves to keep alive in the mind of the
individual a certain system of sentiments necessary for the regulation
of conduct in conformity to the needs of the society. By it the
individual is made to feel (or to act as though he felt) that his life
is one of continually repeated dangers from which he can only be
preserved by conforming to the customs of the society as they have been
handed down by tradition. He is made to feel that the eating of food is
not merely the satisfaction of an animal appetite, but an act of
communion, that the food itself is something “sacred” (if we may use
that word in the sense of the original Latin “sacer”). It serves also,
like any other rite in which all join, to make the individual feel the
solidarity and unity of the community; all share in the common repast
and the common danger, and each man sees on his neighbour the clay with
which he himself is daubed.

Of course it is probable that the Andamanese custom of painting the
body after eating, like our own grace before and after meat, with which
it is parallel, tends to become a formality accompanied by little real
feeling, but it can be shown, I believe, that such customs do possess a
real value—a real psychological function—in keeping alive ideas and
sentiments that will on occasion play an important part in influencing
conduct.

We have not yet completed the study of the Andamanese beliefs about
food. To do so we must examine the initiation ceremonies. I hope to
show that these ceremonies are the means by which the society
powerfully impresses upon the initiate the sense of the social value of
food, and keeps the same sense alive in the minds of the spectators of
the ceremony.

The position in the social life occupied by a child is different from
that of an adult; the child is dependent upon and closely united to his
parents, and is not an independent member of the community. To this
difference in social position there corresponds a difference in the
attitude of a person towards a child and towards an adult, and also a
difference in the attitude of a child and that of an adult towards the
society. As the child grows up a change takes place in his position in
the social life, and this must be accompanied by a change in the
emotional dispositions of the child himself in so far as these regulate
his attitude towards the society, and by a change in the attitude
towards the child of the other members of the group. The initiation
ceremonies are the means by which these changes are brought about, and
by which, therefore, the child is made an independent member of the
society.

The ceremonies have two aspects according as we regard them from the
point of view of the society or from that of the initiate. For the
society they are to be described as the recognition of the change of
status of the initiate, just as the marriage ceremony is the social
recognition of the change of status by marriage. For the initiate they
constitute a sort of moral or social education.

To fit a child for his proper place in the community he needs to be
educated. Part of the process consists of learning how to hunt, how to
make bows and arrows, and so on. This necessary knowledge he acquires
gradually by imitation of his elders, in which he is guided and
encouraged by them. But in addition to this he has to acquire those
sentiments or emotional dispositions which regulate the conduct of
members of the society and constitute morality. Part of this education
in morality, this education of the sentiments, takes place gradually as
the child grows up, less by any actual instruction than by processes of
imitation and suggestion; but in this connection an extremely important
part is played by the initiation ceremonies. That the long series of
abstentions and ceremonies does have a very powerful emotional effect
on the youth or girl may be readily observed by an eye-witness; that
their permanent effect is to create in his or her mind a number of
sentiments that previously existed not at all or only in an undeveloped
condition will be shown in the course of the present argument.

Since in the life of the Andamans by far the most important social
activity is the getting of food, and it is in connection with food that
the social sentiments are most frequently called into action, it is
therefore appropriate that it should be through his relation to food
that the child should be taught his relation to the society, and thus
have those sentiments implanted in him or brought to the necessary
degree of strength. During his infancy the child is almost entirely
unrestrained and acts with great comparative freedom. He does not
realise, in any adequate manner, that the food with which he is freely
provided (for children are the last to suffer hunger) is only obtained
by skill and effort, nor does he realise that he will one day be
required to labour to supply food for others. There follows a period of
restraint, during which the growing boy or girl has to give up eating
certain relished foods, and has to pass through a number of ceremonies,
some of them painful, and all solemn and awe-inspiring. These
restraints on the action of the individual are not imposed by one
person, but by the whole society backed by the whole force of
tradition. Through a series of years, just at what is, for
physiological reasons, the most impressionable age, the individual
learns to subordinate his own desires to the requirements of the
society or of custom, as explained to him by his elders. He is thus
impressed, in a forcible manner, with the importance of the moral law,
and at the same time he is impressed with a sense of the social value
of food. The ceremonies thus afford a moral education adapted to the
requirements of life as it is lived in the Andamans. It would need a
very lengthy analysis to show all the effects of the ceremonies on the
emotional life of those who undergo them, and for the purpose of this
chapter such an analysis is unnecessary. It will suffice merely to
mention a few of the more important. As stated above, the ceremonies
teach the boy or girl self-control or self-restraint, and they do so in
relation to one of the two fundamental human instincts,—hunger. The
cutting of the boy’s back in the North Andaman gives a still sharper
lesson in self-control in the endurance of pain. Secondly the
ceremonies teach the initiate, for the first time in life, to view life
and its duties and obligations seriously. The various ceremonies are
all very solemn affairs for the initiate. Again, the growing boy or
girl is made to feel very strongly the importance of conforming to the
customs of the community to which he belongs, thus having implanted in
his mind what is certainly one of the most powerful of the sentiments
that regulate conduct in the Andamans. In this connection there may
also be mentioned the respect for elders which is a most important
element in the regulation of social life in all savage communities, and
which is strongly impressed on the initiate throughout the ceremonies.
And yet again, the ceremonies awaken and develop in the adolescent that
fear of unseen danger which, as we shall see later, has a very
important place in the mental life of the Andamanese and an important
function in their moral life. Finally, the whole series of abstentions
and ceremonies serves to develop in the mind of every new member of the
society that sense of the social value of foods with which our argument
has been concerned, which may be briefly described as being a
realisation that food is a possession of the society, that not only the
power to obtain food, but also the power to use it without danger is
something that the individual owes to the society, and that the
bestowal upon him of this power involves the acceptance on his part of
corresponding obligations.

We may say, to look at the matter under another aspect, that the
initiation ceremonies teach the youth or girl to realise what is
implied in being a member of the society by putting him or her during
the period of adolescence in an exceptional position, and, as it were,
outside the society. The youth is no longer a child and may not act as
a child; but he is not yet an adult and may not act as adults do. He
feels himself cut off, as it were, from the ordinary life of the group,
having as yet no share in it. As a child he was not yet aware of what
it means to be a member of a society, but now, by means of the
ceremonies, his attention is directed to the society and its life, by
his being placed in a position of isolation outside it. He begins to
look forward to the time when he will take his proper place as an
adult, and his share in the common life of the camp. At each step of
the ceremonies he feels that he is brought a little closer, until at
last he can feel himself a man amongst men. Thus he is brought to a
consciousness of all that it must mean to him to be a member of the
community; he is taught the significance and value of social communion.

Since the greater part of social life is the getting and eating of
food, to place a person outside the social life would be to forbid him
from partaking of the food that is obtained by the society and consumed
by it. This, however, would result in his starvation. The same object
is attained, however, by making the initiate abstain for a period from
a number of the most important and relished foods, and then making him
abstain for a second period from the others. This is not the only way
however in which the initiate is cut off from social communion. A youth
or girl who is aka-op is not permitted to dance, nor to be decorated
with red paint and white clay. It is in the dance that the community
expresses most completely its own unity. Being forbidden to join in the
dance is therefore to be excluded from the common life. Painting the
body with red paint and white clay is, as we have seen, a way of
expressing that the individual is aware of his own position as a member
of the group having the approval and good-will of his fellows. Thus
these other prohibitions reinforce and supplement the prohibition
against eating certain foods during the period of adolescence, and the
consideration of them serves to confirm the interpretation just given.
I believe that the aka-op is also forbidden to use odu clay as a sign
of mourning, and if this be so it is of considerable significance, as
will be evident after we have considered the meaning of this use of
clay. Unfortunately I am not quite sure of the facts, and so the point
must be left.

To discuss in detail all the features of these ceremonies would take
much space. I propose therefore to take as typical of the others the
ceremony of turtle-eating and to explain its various features. When
this ceremony is performed the youth has been compelled for many months
to abstain from eating turtle, and has thus learnt to realise the
social value of food in general and of turtle in particular. He is now
to have the same lesson impressed upon him in a different way. The
previous part of his education has been the continuous action over a
long period of a not very powerful emotion. He has had to sit quietly
while others regaled themselves with turtle meat and to be satisfied
with less tasty food. At times he has probably gone hungry because the
only food in camp was of kinds that were forbidden to him. The ceremony
he is now to go through acts by producing in the space of a few days a
very intense emotional experience. We have seen that the sense of the
social value of food takes the form of a belief that food is dangerous
to eat, and that its dangers may only be avoided by ritual precautions.
At the turtle-eating ceremony the initiate is eating turtle for the
first time as an adult, and is therefore exposed to great danger which
makes it necessary to guard him with every possible ritual precaution.
This, at any rate, is what the initiate himself is made to feel, and it
is through this that the ceremony has its emotional effects. The
initiate is not, of course, himself possessed by a simple feeling of
fear, though the emotional state of his mind is built up on the basis
of the fear instinct. What he is about to do is a matter of great
danger to himself, but at the same time the precautions that are to be
taken are such as entirely to remedy that danger if they are properly
observed. Thus what he experiences is an intense feeling of the
importance and solemnity of the ritual in which he is to take part.

All the details of the ceremony are readily to be explained as so many
different ways of warding off the danger that threatens the initiate.
He is seated on leaves of the Hibiscus tiliaceus, which, as we have
seen, possess special efficacy against dangers connected with turtle.
Leaves of the same kind are placed under his arms so as to cover his
belly, where, we may suppose, the danger is most intense. A fire is
placed near him, between him and the open sea. It has already been
shown that fire is believed to afford protection against dangers of
this sort, and the appropriateness of the position is due to the fact
that in this instance it is from the sea and the things of the sea that
danger is to be feared. He may not feed himself with his fingers, but
must use a skewer of Hibiscus wood. This is clearly only one more
precaution against danger, though the ideas connected with it are
somewhat obscure. At the beginning of the ceremony the initiate is fed
with turtle by a man who conducts the ceremony and who represents the
society, that latter fact being sometimes symbolised by his wearing
round his shoulders a bark sling such as is used for carrying children.
This means, I think, that it is the society that “gives” the food to
the initiate, giving him at the same time the power to use it with
safety. The older man hands on to the younger the right and the power
to eat which he himself possesses. He makes himself responsible, as it
were, for the action of the initiate. At one stage of the performance
the initiate is rubbed over with red ochre. This is to be understood by
recalling that red ochre and red paint are regarded by the natives as
valuable remedies against sickness and against the spirits that cause
sickness. Immediately afterwards the body of the initiate is spattered
with odu clay. The use of this clay after eating food was explained as
a method of avoiding the dangers supposed to result from eating such
foods as turtle. It is clear that exactly the same explanation will
apply to its use in the initiation ceremonies. I have not found a
satisfactory explanation of the peculiar manner in which it is applied.
That the youth is not allowed to sleep for the first two days of the
ceremony will be explained later in the chapter, when it will be shown
that sleep itself is regarded as a condition of danger.

A notable incident is that at the beginning of the ceremony the female
relatives of the initiate are required by custom to come and weep over
him. An explanation of this has already been given, but may well be
repeated. At each stage of the initiation ceremonies the initiate is
withdrawn from the position of dependence that the child necessarily
occupies, and as children are, for the most part, under the care of
their elder female relatives, the ceremonies result in a partial
destruction of those bonds that unite the initiate to his mother or his
foster-mother and her sisters or to his own elder sisters. The weeping
of the female relatives is as it were a reaction against this lessening
of solidarity. It is evident why the rite is necessarily one-sided. The
female relatives need to feel that they are not being entirely cut off
from the initiate, and so they affirm their attachment to him by
weeping over him. On the other hand the important thing for the
initiate himself is to feel that the bonds that united him as a child
to the women who cared for him are now severed or modified; he must no
longer depend on them but must learn to depend on himself; hence it is
necessary that he should not weep but should remain passive and as it
were indifferent under the tears that are shed over him.

The last part of the ceremony consists of a dance, in which the youth
dances in the middle surrounded by a ring of men. As we have seen that
dancing is in general an affirmation of solidarity between those taking
part, and an expression of the unity of the society, we may well regard
this dance as an affirmation of the solidarity that now exists between
the youth and the other dancers, who are representatives of the society
of adults. There is something more in the dance than this however. I
pointed out that one of the results of taking part in a dance is to
produce in the individual an experience of increased personal force,
and it is obvious that this is a very appropriate feeling for the
initiate who, by his long abstention from turtle, and by the ceremony
he has just been through, has acquired an increase of personal force,
an addition to his social personality. Before the dance the initiate is
decorated with white clay (the snake pattern) and red paint. I have
explained this particular method of painting the body as being a means
of expressing and so producing or reinforcing the feeling of elation
accompanying the recognition by an individual of his own social value,
of the fact that he has deserved and obtained the good-will and regard
of his fellows. The youth who has been through the period of restraint
and the ordeal of the ceremony has done his duty and has earned the
approbation of his friends. It is for this reason that he alone of the
dancers is decorated with the painting that serves to express or arouse
the elation or self-satisfaction that it is right for him to feel. The
painting is the mark of the increase in social value of the initiate
brought about by the turtle-eating ceremony.

There is one aspect of the dance that may be mentioned as being of
importance, and which will be referred to again later, namely that the
movements seem to be in a way imitative of the movements of turtle in
the water. The leaves used in the dance are those that possess magical
efficacy against dangers from turtle.

I have not been able to satisfy myself as to the meaning of the belt
and necklace of Pothos scandens worn by the initiate in the dance and
for some days afterwards. It is probable that the clue to this lies in
the resemblance of the leaves to the shape of a phallus, but I have no
clear evidence that this is the real explanation, and therefore offer
it as merely a surmise.

If the natives be asked the reason for these ceremonies they often
reply that their purpose is to make the youth or girl grow up strong.
By this word “strong” they seem to mean in the first instance
able-bodied, skilful (in hunting, etc.) and above all able to avoid or
resist disease. They believe that anyone who did not pass through the
ceremonies would be certain to die at an early age, and they recall the
instance of one young man who refused to submit to the ceremonies who
died before reaching maturity. Now, since the danger that they fear in
eating food is said to be sickness, we may translate their statement
into other terms by saying that the purpose of the initiation
ceremonies is to endow the initiate with the power to eat the dangerous
foods with comparative safety.

It would seem that an infant, being completely dependent upon his
parents, is protected by that dependence from the danger of foods, but
the adult is only able to make use of food with safety by reason of the
possession within himself of a special power with which it is the
purpose of the initiation ceremonies to endow him. Each kind of food
has its own kind of dangerous power, and therefore every individual
needs to be endowed with the special power to avoid each kind of
danger. For this reason there is a separate ceremony for each of the
important kinds of food. Thus we see very clearly that, for the
Andamanese, food, or the power to make use of food without danger, is
essentially a possession of the society, and one function of the
initiation ceremonies is to keep alive this sentiment.

But there is a further meaning, I think, lying behind the statement
that the initiation ceremonies endow the youth or girl with strength. I
have already argued that all the most important social sentiments are
closely associated with the sense of the social value of food, and
although the initiation ceremonies are chiefly concerned with food,
that is only because that is the easiest way by which to get at the
main system of social sentiments. So that behind the special meaning of
the ceremonies with relation to food we must look for a more general
meaning in relation to the social life in general. This may be
conveniently stated by saying that the purpose of the ceremonies is to
endow the individual with a social personality. By the social
personality of a person I mean the sum of those qualities by which he
is able to affect the society. It is, in other words, what gives him
his social value. The social personality depends in the first place on
the social status of the individual. A young child seems to be regarded
as having no social personality. He is not an independent member of the
society, and therefore has no immediate social value, no direct effect
on the general social life. At any rate the social personality of a
child is something very different from that of an adult. So, since the
initiation ceremonies provide the passage from childhood to manhood or
womanhood we may describe them as the means by which the society endows
the child with an adult social personality.

But the social personality of an individual also depends on his
personal qualities, his strength and intelligence, his skill as a
hunter, and on his moral qualities, whether he is mean or generous,
quarrelsome or good-tempered, and so on, for all these things help to
determine the place he occupies in the social life and the effects he
has upon it. Above all, the social personality depends upon the
development in the individual of those sentiments by which the social
life is regulated and by which the social cohesion is preserved. Now we
have seen that the initiation ceremonies do serve to develop these
sentiments in the mind of the initiate, and we may therefore say that
in this respect also it is true that the initiation ceremonies serve to
develop in the child the social personality of an adult.

The consideration of the initiation ceremonies has served to confirm
the hypothesis that the Andamanese customs relating to food are all of
them different modes of expressing the social value of foods. We have
now to consider the nature of the dangers that are supposed to accrue
from the eating of food if due precautions be not taken. One statement
of the natives is that the danger they fear is sickness. Now sickness
of all kinds is believed by the Andamanese to be caused by certain
supernatural beings called Lau or Čauga,—the spirits of the dead; and
further, we have seen that the danger connected with food is sometimes
said to be the danger of an attack by the spirits. So that it is
evident that to understand the meaning of the fear of foods it is first
of all necessary to understand the notions they have about the spirits,
and to do this we shall have to consider the various customs relating
to death and burial.

For the society a death is the loss of one of its members, one of its
constituent parts. A person occupies a definite position in society,
has a certain share in the social life, is one of the supports of the
network of social relations. His death constitutes a partial
destruction of the social cohesion, the normal social life is
disorganised, the social equilibrium is disturbed. After the death the
society has to organise itself anew and reach a new condition of
equilibrium. In reference to the small community of the Andamans we may
translate the above statement into terms of personal feeling by saying
that the death removes a person who was the object of feelings of
affection and attachment on the part of others and is thus a direct
offence against those sentiments in the survivors.

Though the dead man has ceased to exist as a member of the society, it
is clear that he has by no means ceased to influence the society. On
the contrary he has become the source of intense painful emotions.
Where the affection that was felt towards him was previously a source
of pleasure it now becomes a source of pain. Defining the “social
personality” of an individual as being the sum of characteristics by
which he has an effect upon the social life and therefore on the social
sentiments of others, we may say that by death the social personality
is not annihilated but undergoes a profound change, so that from being
an object of pleasurable states of the social sentiments it becomes an
object of painful states. This is expressed by the Andamanese by saying
that by death a man or woman becomes a Lau.

The burial customs of the Andaman Islanders, however, are not to be
regarded as simply the expression of natural personal feeling. They are
a collective and ritual expression of a collective feeling. This is
evident from the fact that they are regulated in every detail by
custom. It is the duty of the relatives and friends to mourn, whether
they feel sorrow or not, and it is equally their duty to mourn only for
a certain period.

The cohesion of a social group, by which is maintained its existence as
a group, depends directly on the existence of a collective system of
sentiments or affective dispositions that bind every member to every
other. The death, or removal by any other means, of a member of the
group is a direct attack against these sentiments. Now whenever a
sentiment of any kind is subjected to an attack of such a kind as this
there are only two possible alternatives; either the sentiment must
suffer a diminution of its intrinsic energy, and thus be less capable
of controlling behaviour in the future; or it must find an outlet in an
expressive action of some sort which serves as a reaction of defence or
compensation and restores the sentiment to its former condition of
strength. The typical example of such an emotional reaction is anger;
anything that wounds our self-regarding feelings arouses our anger; if
it did not do so those feelings would gradually weaken. This law holds
true of collective sentiments as well as of individual sentiments. If
the society permitted its solidarity to be attacked, whether by death
or by any other means, without reacting in such a way as to give relief
to wounded social feelings and so to reinstate them in their former
condition, these sentiments would lose their strength and the society
its cohesion. The burial customs of the Andamanese are to be explained,
I believe, as a collective reaction against the attack on the
collective feeling of solidarity constituted by the death of a member
of the social group.

The man being dead, the first thing that the society does is to sever
its connection with him, and the first step in this process is to get
rid of the body by burying it or placing it in a tree, to abandon the
camp at which he died, and temporarily to drop the use of his name. It
is often supposed that customs such as these, which are found in many
primitive societies, are due to the fear of the dead man’s spirit. That
there is an element of fear present is undoubtedly true, but this fear
does not seem to be by any means instinctive, and therefore comparable
to the fear that some animals exhibit towards the dead body of one of
their species. On the contrary the fear itself needs to be explained,
and this will have to be attempted later.

There is one group of facts which show very clearly that the burial
customs are not solely due to an instinctive fear of dead bodies,
namely that the customs vary according to the social position of the
deceased. A child plays very little part in the general life of the
community; hence on the death of a child the camp is not deserted and
only the parents are subjected to the mourning ritual. Similarly the
death of a person who has for long been so ill as not to be able to
take any important part in social life has very little effect on the
community as a whole; the body of such a one is disposed of with scant
ceremony and mourning is perfunctory. On the other hand the death of a
noted hunter in the prime of life, of a man who is esteemed as a
leader, is a much greater loss; the whole community mourns for him; his
body is placed on a tree instead of in the ground, showing that his
death is regarded as something different from the death of a person who
is interred. The body of a stranger who dies or is killed is not
buried, but is thrown into the sea or cut up and burnt. The explanation
that the natives give of this custom of burning the body is that it
serves to dispel danger that might accrue from the presence of the dead
body of a stranger. The blood and the fat of the dead man, from which
they appear to fear evil influences, are, they say, driven up to the
sky in the smoke of the fire and are thus rendered harmless.

There is, then, a close correspondence between the manner of burial and
the social value of the person buried, and it is evident that the
differences in the mode of disposing of the body are quite inexplicable
on the assumption that the funeral customs are solely due to the fear
of the dead.

Before burial the corpse is decorated with white clay and red paint. We
have already seen that this is an expression on the part of the
survivors of their regard for the deceased. A living man or woman is
decorated in this way when, for some special reason, it is desired to
express the fact that he or she has the good-will and regard of others,
and it is applied to the dead body with exactly the same meaning. Fire
and water are placed beside the grave. It is not necessary to suppose
that the Andamanese believe that the spirit of the dead man makes any
use of these, any more than it is necessary for us to believe that the
spirit enjoys the flowers that it is our custom to place upon the
grave. The action in each case is symbolical.

The dead man was bound by ties of solidarity to those still living. Now
that he is dead those ties have not ceased to exist, but continue until
the society has recovered from the effects of the death, for they are
based on deep-seated and elaborately organised sentiments. I believe
that the mourning customs of the Andamanese are to be explained on this
basis, as being the means by which the social sentiments of the
survivors are slowly reorganised and adapted to the new condition
produced by the death. The severance of the dead man from the society
is not a sudden but a gradual process, during which his relatives and
friends, being still attached to him by social ties, are in an abnormal
condition which may be defined as a partial separation from the world
of living men and women and a partial aggregation to the world of the
dead (i.e. the spirit world). This abnormal condition of the mourner is
shown chiefly in his or her withdrawal from participation in the
ordinary life of the society. We have seen that the eating of food is,
for the Andamanese, one of the most important of social actions, a kind
of communion of the society, and that during the period of adolescence
a youth is separated or withdrawn from the common life of the group by
being forbidden to eat certain foods. So, in strict conformity with the
same set of notions, the mourner is separated from the normal life of
the society by being forbidden to eat pork or turtle, these being the
most important foods that the Andamanese have [171]. Like the aka-op,
also, the mourner is forbidden to take part in a dance, or to decorate
himself with red paint and white clay, for by these actions the Andaman
Islander becomes conscious of his position as a member of a closely
unified group, and it is necessary for the mourner, as for the aka-op,
to feel that for the time being he is cut off from the ordinary life of
the group. The disuse, during the period of mourning, of the name of a
mourner is to be explained, as we shall see more plainly later, on the
same principle, the personal name being what marks the person’s
position in the social life, so that the temporary dropping of the name
shows that for the time being the person is not occupying his normal
social position.

The distinctive sign of a mourner is the use of clay, which is smeared
over the body and head, and from the name of this clay is derived the
term that denotes a mourner (aka-odu). It is possible to explain this
also as a symbolic expression of the separation of the mourner from the
world of living men and his aggregation to the world of the dead. In
his everyday life the Andaman Islander is black from head to foot.
During mourning he turns himself as nearly as possible white from head
to foot, by covering his body all over with clay. It must be remembered
that the spirits of the dead are said to be white or light in colour.
This is undoubtedly one of the reasons why the (light-coloured) natives
of India are called spirits (Lau), while men of such a dark-coloured
race as the African negroes are not referred to by this term. The use
of clay would therefore seem to serve not only to make the mourner
unlike his ordinary self, but to make him like the spirits of the dead.

Of course, the natives explain all these customs of mourning as being
expressions of sorrow for their loss, and this is, from the simple
standpoint of everyday life, an adequate and true explanation. From the
standpoint of psychology, however, what we need to know is why the
sorrow is expressed in just these ways and no others. Moreover, the
natives give as a further reason for the mourning customs that if they
did not observe them they would be liable to sickness or even death.

I have said that the Andamanese believe that by death a man or woman
becomes a Lau, but there is a little uncertainty in the statements of
the natives as to whether he becomes a spirit at once, immediately
after the death, or whether he does so only after the flesh of the body
has decayed. Both statements are sometimes made, but it seems common to
think of the dead person during the period of mourning not as a spirit
(Lau) but as a dead man (empilo). We may best express the ideas of the
natives by saying that the process by which a man becomes a spirit is
one that takes some months to complete, and is only ended when the
bones are dug up. An interesting insight into their notions in this
matter is afforded by a belief, about which unfortunately I have very
scanty information, to the effect that when a man dies he is initiated
into the world of the dead by a ceremony resembling the ceremonies by
which a youth is initiated into manhood. In the statement of an
Aka-Kede informant the ceremony was spoken of by the term kimil, which
is generally used for the initiation ceremonies, and was described as a
po̱ro̱to-kimil, i.e., a ceremony in which the dead man ate po̱ro̱to
(Caryota sobolifera) in just the same way that a youth eats turtle
(čokbi) at the čokbi-kimil. There is independent evidence that there is
a special connection between the spirits of the dead and the Caryota
palm [172].

The description of this ceremony (of initiation into the world of the
dead) that was given to me stated that in it the shredded fibre named
ko̱ro was used in just the same way as the leaves of the Hibiscus are
used in the turtle-eating ceremony. Further, as in the peace-making
ceremony men stand against a suspended cane from which depend bunches
of this same ko̱ro, so in the initiation into the spirit world the
initiate has to stand against the rainbow while the dancing spirits
shake it and him. It is this shaking of the rainbow (according to my
informant) that causes earthquakes. It may be recalled that the rainbow
is regarded as a sort of bridge between this world and the spirit
world, and that its name is “the spirit’s cane,” so that it would seem
that it is regarded as like a cane with ko̱ro fibre suspended from it,
such as is used in the peace-making ceremony.

The explanation of the use of this ko̱ro fibre was postponed earlier in
the chapter, and may well be undertaken here. It serves as a sign that
the spot where it is placed is tabu, or, in more precise terms, that
the spot must be avoided because of the presence there of a force or
power that makes things dangerous. This force is present at the grave
of a dead man, and therefore the fibre is placed at the grave to mark
the fact, while a bunch is similarly suspended at the entrance to a
village that is deserted after a death. In the peace-making ceremony
the members of the one party stand against a suspended cane to which
are attached strips of the fibre. The meaning of this, I think, is that
it thus forbids the members of the other party from attacking them. If
a man were to leave the screen of ko̱ro, he would, I believe, be liable
to be killed by the enemy party; it is only as long as he stands
against it with his arms outstretched that he is safe, because while
there he is tabu.

How then does this belief in the fibre as a mark of tabu come about?
The fibre is worn by the women of the Little Andaman to cover their
pudenda, and it was formerly worn in this way by the women of the North
Andaman. We may conclude that this was an old element in the Andaman
culture dating back to the remote period when the inhabitants of the
Little Andaman became separated from those of the Great Andaman. Now in
a very special sense the sexual organs of women are tabu, and, without
discussing the matter in detail, we may suppose that the Andaman
Islander regards the genitals of women as a spot in which resides the
same sort of force or power that makes the spirits, or the body of a
dead man, dangerous. One point may be mentioned as throwing light on
this subject, and helping forward the argument, namely that the natives
of the North Andaman often use the expression Lau-buku (meaning
literally “spirit-women” or “female spirits”) to denote women
collectively instead of the phrase that might be expected—n’e-buku. It
would seem that by reason of their sex and the special ideas that are
associated with it, women are regarded as having a very special
relation with the world of spirits. We may conclude that the ko̱ro
fibre, being a convenient material for the purpose, was first used as a
covering for the women, and in this way came to be used as a sign of
tabu in general, or else that for some unknown reason the fibre was
selected as a suitable material to mark any kind of tabu, and so came
to be used both as a covering for women and also as a sign of warning
at the grave and the village that has been visited by death [173].

To return from this digression to the question of the initiation of the
dead man into the world of spirits, it is clear that since such
ceremonies take time to accomplish there is a period during which the
dead man is in an indeterminate position; he is no longer a member of
the society of the living, and has not yet become a member of the
society of the dead. As long as he is thus situated his relatives and
friends are still attached to him, so that he still remains as it were
in partial contact with the living. During this time the society is
still suffering the ill effects of the death, and the process of
readjustment by means of the customs of mourning is still taking place.
At the end of it the dead man becomes completely absorbed in the spirit
world, and as a spirit he has no more part in or influence over the
social life than any other spirit, and the mourning is brought to a
close by means of a ceremony.

This ceremony has two parts. One is the recovery of the bones and their
reaggregation to the society, a rite which we may regard as the final
settling of the dead man in his proper place. All that is left of him,
who was once a source of strength to the community, who had once—as it
is here expressed—a social value, are the bones, his name, and the
memory of him that his friends retain. We may suppose that the bones
still have something of the value that originally attached to their
owner, and indeed it is evident that they have, for after they are
recovered they are affectionately treasured as relics by the relatives.
By the end of the period of mourning the painful feelings aroused by
the death have died down, so that the dead man is now the object only
of memories that are pleasant, or, at the worst, bitter-sweet. The
bones, then, are visible evidences of the fact that the society has
recovered from the disruptive shock of the death, and this is why they
are dug up as soon as the recovery is complete, or rather in order to
complete it, and are thereafter treasured. It should now be clear why
the Andamanese attribute to the bones of dead persons the power to
protect them from unseen dangers. Like the bones of animals that have
been eaten they are visible and wearable signs of past dangers overcome
through the protective action of the society itself, and are therefore
a guarantee of similar protection in the future. And as the death of a
member is an enormously more important event for the community than the
mere killing and eating of a dugong, so an enormously greater
protective power is attributed to the human bones than to those of any
animal.

The bones, then, are dug up, and brought into camp, where they are wept
over just as a friend who has been absent is wept over. All that is
left of the former person returns to the social life, henceforward to
occupy a definite place in it, and the weeping is the rite of
aggregation, the expression of the attachment of those who weep to the
bones that now return to them from the grave. The skull and jawbone and
the long bones are then decorated with red paint and white clay, this
being the way in which the relatives express their sense of the value
of them. The other bones are made up into strings and distributed to be
used on occasion as amulets.

Soon after the digging up of the bones the other part of the ceremony
of the end of mourning takes place. We have seen that while the dead
man was in an indeterminate position his relatives were still attached
to him by social bonds, but now that he has finally become a spirit,
and is for ever definitely cut off from the human society, these bonds
cease to exist. The mourners, therefore, who have been cut off from the
normal social life are free to return to it and even if they should not
so desire, yet it is their duty to do so. The return of the mourners to
the society is marked by a dance. The clay that has marked their
condition is taken off, and they are decorated with white clay and red
paint and all the ornaments usual on ceremonial occasions. Thus
decorated they dance, the women on this occasion being required to
dance as well as the men. The dance is interrupted shortly after it is
begun in order that those who have not been mourning may weep with the
mourners. The weeping, according to the explanation at the beginning of
the chapter is a rite of aggregation by which the mourners are welcomed
back to the society, just as returning friends are welcomed after an
absence. It has nothing whatever to do, I believe, with the dead person
for whom they have been mourning, but is merely an expression of
solidarity between those still alive. Dancing and the decorations used
in the dance, I have argued, are means by which the society expresses
its own unity, and makes the individual realise what it means to be one
of a group, so that in this dance we see the society once more coming
together to continue its common life, and compelling those who have
been cut off from it to feel, even against their inclinations, that
they have become once more units of the social body. After this
ceremony the mourners are relieved from the restrictions to which they
were subjected.

In order to complete this discussion of the burial customs it is
necessary to explain why a person’s name should be dropped from use
after his death, and although this will require a digression of some
length, this seems the most convenient point at which to deal with it.
There is a very special relation between the name of anything and its
fundamental characteristics, which in logic we describe by saying that
the latter are included in the connotation of the name. The way in
which the Andamanese represent this relation to themselves is shown in
one of the legends. At a time when the ancestors did not know either
the names or the uses of the different objects to be found in their
country, one of them, Da Teŋat by name, walked through the forest
enquiring of the objects he met what were their names. From most of
them he received no reply, but the yam and the resin replied to him and
gave him their names. The legend shows that as soon as the hero of the
tale knew the name of the yam he immediately knew that it was of use as
a food and that it required to be cooked in a particular way, although
he was till then ignorant of those important properties. Similarly,
having discovered the name of the resin he knew that it could be made
into a torch and so used to give light.

There is, to the mind of the Andaman Islander, a somewhat similar and
very important connection between a person’s name and what is here
called his social personality, and this is exhibited in the customs
whereby the name is avoided on certain occasions. A consideration of
the different instances will show, I think, that the name is always
avoided whenever the owner is for any reason prevented from taking his
or her usual place in the life of the society. At such times the social
personality is as it were suppressed, and the name which represents it
is therefore also suppressed.

From the moment of her first menstruation to the date of her marriage,
or more strictly to the date of her first parturition, the birth-name
of a woman is dropped from use and she is called by her flower-name. A
woman only attains her complete social personality as a mother. As a
child she has not the power to become a mother. She acquires that power
at her first menstruation and therefore from that time until this new
virtue is actively exercised she is in a position in which one of her
virtues, one of the qualities making up her social personality, is in
abeyance. Therefore her name (her birth-name) is not used and she is
given a temporary name in its place, a flower-name. She is, as it were,
in blossom, and only when her body ripens to its fruit is she a
complete woman.

At certain stages of the initiation ceremonies the name of a youth or
of a girl (the flower-name in this instance) is avoided for a certain
period. Such occasions are during, and for some time after, any of the
more important ceremonies, such as the cutting of the boy’s back, the
puberty ceremony of the girl, the turtle-eating and pig-eating
ceremonies. After a boy’s back is cut he is addressed and spoken of for
some time as Eǰido, his own name not being spoken. Similarly during and
after the turtle-eating or the pig-eating ceremony he is addressed and
spoken of by the name Kimil. The explanation of these customs is that
at these times the initiate is in an abnormal position by reason of the
ceremony that has taken place, and is not permitted to take an ordinary
part in social life. After the initiation ceremony, for example, the
youth is not permitted to handle a bow for some weeks (the bow being
the typical masculine implement).

The names of a newly-married couple are avoided for a few days after
their marriage. Marriage produces an important change in the social
personality, and this change is expressed in the marriage ceremony, but
all such changes take time, and it is some days at least before the
married couple can be expected to have settled down in their new
positions. For these days, therefore, their names are not used. The
same sort of explanation will hold for the custom of dropping the names
of a father and mother before and after the birth of a child,
particularly the first born.

At the turtle-eating ceremony of the North Andaman coast-dwellers the
youth is given a new name. It is possible that a girl is also given a
new name at this time, and that another name is also given to the youth
at the pig-eating ceremony, but on these points I neglected to make
sufficient enquiry. The name given at the turtle-eating ceremony is
never used and is not likely to be known except to those who were
present at the ceremony, and therefore serves no such purpose as the
flower-name of the girl. The giving of the name is simply the mark of
the change of social personality brought about by the ceremony. The
youth receives an addition to his personality and therefore receives an
additional name. It is significant that all the names given at this
ceremony have reference to the sea and to things of the sea,
particularly to turtle, such as Čokbi-čiro, turtle-liver, Čokbi-tei,
turtle-blood, etc.

During the period of mourning, when, as we have seen, the mourner is
withdrawn from the ordinary life of the society, his name is not used,
showing that during this period his social personality is in a state of
partial suppression. After the mourning period is over the mourner,
when he resumes his social personality, resumes at the same time his
name.

Now death is the most fundamental modification of the social
personality that is possible and therefore the name of a person
recently dead is strictly avoided. Death, however, does not destroy the
social personality utterly and for ever, but produces in it a profound
change, which begins at the death itself and is only completed at the
end of and by means of the customs of mourning. After the mourning is
over the virtues of the dead man affect the survivors through memory,
and his bones form a precious possession of the community, thus
constituting for him a new social value, a new personality. During the
period of change, while the personality does not exist in the same form
as before the death, but does not yet exist in the form in which it
will when he lives only in the memory of his friends, the name is not
used. After the mourning period is over the name may again be used.

In general then, it may be said that at any period in which a person is
undergoing a critical change in his condition in so far as it affects
the society his name falls out of use, to be resumed when the period of
change is over. The reason for this is that during such periods of
change the social personality is suppressed or latent and therefore the
name which is closely associated with the social personality must be
suppressed also.

The customs of burial and mourning are therefore seen to be not simply
the result of natural feelings of fear and sorrow but ritual actions
performed under a sense of obligation and strictly regulated by
tradition. They are means by which the society acts upon its members,
compelling them to feel emotions appropriate to the occasion. Since the
dead person has, by his death, become a cause of social disruption, all
contact with him must be avoided. But the dead man had a certain value
to the society, and as a thing of any kind cannot be valued unless its
loss is felt as a source of pain, so if the community did not mourn
when it lost one of its members that feeling of the social value of
individuals on which the existence of the society depends would soon
diminish in strength, thereby weakening the social cohesion.

It is now possible for us to understand the Andamanese beliefs about
the spirits. The basis of these beliefs, I wish to maintain, is the
fact that at the death of an individual his social personality (as
defined above) is not annihilated, but is suddenly changed. This
continuance after death is a fact of immediate experience to the
Andaman Islanders and not in any way a deduction. The person has not
ceased to exist. For one thing his body is still there. But above all
he is still the object of the social sentiments of the survivors, and
thereby he continues to act upon the society. The removal of a member
of the group is felt not as something negative but as the positive
cause of great social disturbance.

The spirits are feared or regarded as dangerous. The basis of this fear
is the fact that the spirit (i.e. the social personality of a person
recently dead) is obviously a source of weakness and disruption to the
community, affecting the survivors through their attachment to him, and
producing a condition of dysphoria, of diminished social activity. The
natural impulse of the Andaman Islander or of any other human being,
would be, I believe, not to shun the dead body of a loved one, but to
remain near it as long as possible. It is the society, acting under a
quite different set of impulses, that compels the relatives to separate
themselves from the remains of the one they loved. The death of a small
child has very little influence on the general activity of the
community, and the motive for severing connection with the dead that is
present in the case of an adult, either does not exist or is so weak as
to be overruled by the private feelings of affection, and so the child
is buried in the hut of the parents, that they may continue to keep it
near them. This affords a good test of the hypothesis, and gives strong
support to the view that the fear of the dead man (his body and his
spirit) is a collective feeling induced in the society by the fact that
by death he has become the object of a dysphoric condition of the
collective consciousness.

If the Andamanese are asked what they fear from the spirit of a dead
man they reply that they fear sickness or death, and that if the burial
and mourning customs are not properly observed the relatives of the
dead person will fall sick and perhaps die.

The basis of this notion of the spirits is that the near relatives of
the deceased, being bound to him by close social ties, are influenced
by everything that happens to him, and share in his good or evil
fortune. So that when by sickness and resulting death he is removed
from the community, they are as it were drawn after him. For this
reason they are, during the period of mourning, between life and death,
being still attached to the dead man. Contact with the world of the
dead is therefore regarded as dangerous for the living because it is
believed that they may be drawn completely into that world. Death is a
process by which a person leaves the living world and enters the world
of the spirits, and since no one dies willingly he is conceived as
being under a compulsive force acting from the world of spirits. Now
sickness is a condition that often ends in death, a first stage of the
way leading to the world of spirits. Hence sickness is conceived by the
Andamanese as a condition of partial contact with that world. This is
what is meant by the statement that sickness and death come from the
spirits.

The way the Andamanese think about the spirits is shown in the
Akar-Bale legend of the origin of death [174]. Yaramurud, having died
through an accident, self-caused, becomes a spirit, but he does so only
under the compulsion exercised upon him by his mother, who, now that he
is dead, insists that he must go away from the world of the living and
become a spirit. The spirit then comes back to see his brother and by
this contact causes the brother’s death. The story implies that it was
not because Yaramurud was evilly disposed towards his brother that he
killed him, but on the contrary it was his attachment to his relative
that caused him to return to visit him, and death followed as a result
of this contact of the living man with the spirit. Since that time
deaths have continued to occur in the same way. Thus it appears that
the Andamanese conceive that the spirits do not cause death and
sickness through evil intention, but through their mere proximity, and,
as the legend very clearly shows, the burial customs are intended to
cut off the unwilling spirit from contact with the living. This
explains also why during the period of mourning the relatives of a dead
person are thought to be in danger of sickness, and have more to fear
from the spirit than others, for since it is they who were most
attached to him during life it is they who are most likely to suffer
from contact with him after he is dead. It was Yaramurud’s brother who
was the first to die through the influence of the spirits.

The feelings of the living towards the spirits of the dead are
therefore ambivalent, compounded of affection and fear, and this must
be clearly recognized if we are to understand all the Andamanese
beliefs and customs. We may compare the relation between the society of
the living and the society of the dead to that between two hostile
communities having occasional friendly relations. That the Andamanese
themselves look upon it in some such way is shown by the belief that
the ceremony by which a dead man is initiated into the world of spirits
resembles the peace-making ceremony. The dead man, up to the time of
his death, has been living in a state of enmity with the spirits, and
before he can enter their community and share their life he has to make
peace with them in the same way that men make peace with one another
after they have been at war.

This notion of hostility between the society and the world of spirits
is found in other primitive societies, and seems everywhere to have a
definite social function. The removal of a member of the community
either by death or otherwise is a direct attack on the social
solidarity and produces in primitive societies an emotional reaction of
the same general character as anger. This collective anger, if freely
expressed, serves as a compensating mechanism, satisfying and restoring
the damaged sentiment [175]. But this can only happen if there is some
object against which the anger can be directed. In the instance of
homicide the social anger is directed against the person responsible
for the death and against the social group to which he belongs. In the
instance of death from sickness some other object has to be found, and
amongst primitive peoples there are two chief ways in which this is
done. An example of one method is afforded by the tribes of Australia,
amongst whom there is a strong and constant hostility between
neighbouring local groups, with a result that the anger at a death from
sickness directs itself against some community with which the group of
the dead man is at enmity and it is believed that some member of that
community has caused the death by magic. The Andamans afford an example
of the second method. Amongst them it would seem that the enmity
between different local groups (except as concerns the J̌a̤rawa in the
South Andaman) was never very strong and the belief in evil magic was
not highly developed, so that the anger at a death is directed against
the spirits, and sometimes find expression in violent railings against
them, accompanied by all the bodily manifestations of extreme rage and
hatred.

Now though the Andamanese regard the spirits with fear and hatred, and
believe that all contact with them is dangerous for living men, yet
they do not look on them as essentially evil, for that would conflict
with their own feelings of attachment to their dead friends.

I gathered a few hints that they even believe that at times the spirits
can and will help them. Thus a man will call on the sea-spirits of his
own country to send plenty of turtle (over which the spirits seem to be
assumed to have power) when he is going hunting. A very important fact
in this connection is the different way in which a native regards the
spirits of his own country and of other parts, the latter being thought
to be much more dangerous than the former because presumably they are
the spirits not of relatives and friends but of strangers at the best
or enemies at the worst.

There is other evidence that the Andamanese do not regard the power
that is possessed by the spirits as being essentially evil. This power,
whereby the spirits are able to cause sickness, seems to be shared by
the bones of dead men. Indeed the Andamanese call such bones
“spirit-bones” (lau-to̱i, čauga-ta). Now this power in the bones (though
it may at times be supposed to cause sickness) is more commonly made
use of in order to prevent or cure it.

The most conclusive evidence that the power of the spirits is not
intrinsically evil, but may be used to produce both good and evil is
afforded by the beliefs about medicine-men or dreamers (oko-ǰumu).
There are three ways in which a man can become a medicine-man. The
first is (as the natives put it) by dying and coming back to life. Now
when a man dies he becomes a spirit and therefore acquires the peculiar
powers and qualities of a spirit, which he retains if he returns to
life. Secondly, if a man straying in the jungle by himself be affronted
by the spirits, and if he show no fear (for if he is afraid they will
kill him) they may keep him with them for a time and then let him go.
Such a man, on his return, is regarded as being a medicine-man, and
possessing all the powers of medicine-men. I was told of one man who
became a medicine-man in this way within living memory, and it was
stated that when he returned from the forest where he had been kept by
the spirits for two or three days he was decorated with ko̱ro fibre. We
have seen that this fibre is used by the spirits in the ceremony by
which they initiate dead men, and its presence on the returned warrior
was perhaps accepted by his friends as evidence that he had been
initiated by the spirits. The third and last way in which a man may
become a medicine-man is by having intercourse with the spirits in his
dreams. This is a point to which it will be necessary to return later.
For the present it is sufficient to note that in every instance the
power of the medicine-man is believed to be derived from his contact
with the spirits in one of the three possible ways.

We are justified in concluding that the special power of the
medicine-man, by which he is distinguished from his fellows, is simply
the same power that is possessed by the spirits, from contact with whom
he has obtained it. The medicine-man is believed to be able both to
cause and to cure sickness, to arouse and to dispel storms. In other
words he has power for both good and evil, and we must conclude that
the spirits have the same. Moreover, it is commonly said that the
medicine-man is able to produce the effects he does, whether they be
harmful or beneficial to his fellows, by communicating with the spirits
in dreams and enlisting their aid. This would seem to prove the point
that I am here concerned with, that the power possessed by the spirits,
though contact with it is always dangerous, may yet in certain
circumstances be of benefit to the society, and is therefore not
essentially evil in nature.

The Andamanese believe that a medicine-man communicates with the
spirits in sleep, and this is not the only evidence that they believe
sleep to be a condition in which contact with the world of spirits is
easier than in waking life. It is believed that sickness is more likely
to begin during sleep than when awake. During the initiation ceremonies
the initiate is required to abstain from sleep after eating pork or
turtle, and this would seem to be because sleep is regarded as
generally dangerous and therefore to be avoided on such occasions as
this when every precaution needs to be taken.

The explanation of this belief seems to lie in the fact that sleep is a
condition of diminished social activity, in which the individual is
withdrawn from active social life, and is therefore also withdrawn from
the protection of the society. After eating turtle the initiate is in
urgent need of the protection of the society, which would be lost to
him if he were permitted to sleep. After a death, when the corpse
remains in the camp all night the people remain awake, and since there
is no other common activity in which they can join, they sing, and thus
protect themselves from the spirits that are present as the cause of
the death.

This explanation implies that all conditions of diminished social
activity on the part of an individual are dangerous. One example of
such a condition is sickness, in which the sick person is unable to
pursue his ordinary occupations. Other examples are afforded by a
mother, and to a certain extent a father during the period preceding
and following the birth of a child, and by a woman during the menstrual
period. All these, as various customs show, are believed by the
Andamanese to be conditions of danger in which it is necessary to take
ritual or magical precautions. A better example for our purpose is that
of an adolescent during the period covered by the initiation
ceremonies, when, as we have seen, he is as it were cut off from the
society, and there is abundant evidence that the Andamanese believe
this to be a state of danger. Another example is the condition of a
homicide during the period of his isolation. Lastly, we have seen that
a mourner is cut off from the ordinary social life, and it may now be
noted that the native explanation of the restrictions observed in that
state is that if things were not done thus the mourner would be ill; in
other words the condition of mourning is one of danger, and the ritual
referring to it is the means by which the danger (from the spirit
world) is avoided. This explanation does not conflict with the one
previously given but on the contrary we can now see that the notion
that the mourner is in a position partly withdrawn from active
participation in social life necessarily involves the belief that he is
in a condition of danger.

We may conclude that every condition in which the individual is
withdrawn from full participation in active social life is regarded as
dangerous for him, and that this is at least one of the reasons why
sleep is so regarded. We have already noted that all conditions of
danger tend to be thought of as due to contact with the spirits, and
sleep is therefore supposed to be a state in which such contact is
easier than in waking life. Now sleep is visited by dreams and it comes
about that the dream-life, by reason of its contrast with waking-life,
is seized upon by the Andamanese as a means by which the nature of the
spirit world may be represented to the imagination.

The Andaman Islander seems to regard the dream-world as a world of
shadows or reflections, for he uses the same word to denote a shadow, a
reflection in a mirror, and a dream (the stem -ǰumu in Aka-J̌eru). Now
when a man enters this shadow-world in sleep he is, as we have seen,
conceived as coming into partial contact with the world of spirits.
Hence the Andaman Islander believes that in dreams he may communicate
with the spirits, that dreams may be a cause of sickness, and that in
dreams a medicine-man can cause or cure sickness in his fellows. In
this shadow-world the man himself becomes as it were a shadow, a mere
reflection of himself; it is not he that lives and acts in his dreams
but his ot-ǰumulo, his double, his shadow-self, or, as we might say,
his soul. It is but a step from this to the representation of the
spirit-world as a similar world of shadows and dream-shapes, and to the
conclusion that when a man dies it is his ot-ǰumulo that becomes the
spirit.

To summarise the argument, the belief in the world of spirits rests on
the actual fact that a dead person continues to affect the society. As
the effect is one of disorganisation, whereby the social sentiments are
wounded, the dead are avoided and the spirits are regarded with fear.
But as a recently dead person is still regarded with feelings of
attachment by his friends, the resulting final attitude towards the
spirits is ambivalent. By a simple step the spirits come to be regarded
as the cause of sickness and death, and therefore as hostile to living
men. Yet, as the beliefs about medicine-men show, it is possible for
exceptional individuals to be on terms of friendship with the spirits.
Finally, the dream-life affords a means by which the spirit-world may
be represented in a simple and concrete manner. This last feature (the
association of the spirits with dreams) I believe to be a secondary
elaboration of the primary or fundamental belief which shows itself in
the ritual of death and mourning, serving only to rationalise it and
make it more concrete. This need of concrete representation of the
spirit-world shows itself in other beliefs, in which may be seen the
tendency to become self-contradictory that is often the mark of ideas
that arise as the result of attempts to rationalise conative and
affective impulses. The spirits are, on the one hand, as it were
shadows or images of living men, and yet, since they are feared and
disliked, they are often represented as being repulsive and inhuman,
with long legs and short bodies, with long beards and ugly faces [176].
The spirits must be thought of as somewhere, but there is no
consistency in the statements as to where that somewhere is; one man
will say that they live in the sky, another that they are under the
earth, a third will point to a particular island as their home; at the
same time it is evident from other statements that they vaguely
conceive them as being everywhere, in the forest and the sea.

We are now in a position to understand what the Andaman Islander means
when he says that the danger he fears from food is from the spirits.
The greatest evil that can happen to the community is the sickness or
death of its members, and these are believed to be the work of the
spirits. The sense of the social value of food takes the form of a
belief that food is dangerous, and inevitably the danger comes to be
conceived as that of sickness or death, and is therefore associated in
their minds with the spirits.

But there is a more fundamental reason than this. I have tried to show
that it is because food has such important effects for good and evil on
the social life that it is believed to be endued with a peculiar power
which makes it necessary to approach it with ritual precautions. If
this thesis be valid it should be capable of generalisation, and we
should find the same power attributed to every object or being that is
capable of affecting in important ways the well-being of the society.
We should expect that the Andamanese would attribute this power not
only to the more important things used for food but also to such things
as the weather and dead men (i.e., the spirits). Now this, if the
argument has been correct, is exactly what we do find, and we have here
the reason why the Andaman Islander, when asked what he fears from
eating dangerous foods, replies that he fears sickness or the spirits
of the dead.

We may formulate in precise language the beliefs that underlie the
ceremonial, remembering always that the Andaman Islanders themselves
are quite incapable of expressing these beliefs in words and are
probably only vaguely conscious of them. (1) There is a power or force
in all objects or beings that in any way affect the social life. (2) It
is by virtue of this power that such things are able to aid or harm the
society. (3) The power, no matter what may be the object or being in
which it is present, is never either essentially good or essentially
evil, but is able to produce both good and evil results. (4) Any
contact with the power is dangerous, but the danger is avoided by
ritual precautions. (5) The degree of power possessed by anything is
directly proportioned to the importance of the effects that it has on
the social life. (6) The power in one thing may be used to counteract
the danger due to contact with the power in some other thing.

We have studied this power in the animals and plants used for food and
the things used as materials. It is this that makes turtle dangerous to
eat and Anadendron fibre dangerous to prepare, and it is this also that
makes animal bones or the leaves of Hibiscus available for protection.
We have now seen that the same power is present in dead men, in their
bodies, their bones, and in the spirit-world to which dead men go. All
contact with the world of the dead is highly dangerous, and yet we have
seen that human bones may be used for protection and that even the
spirits may be induced to heal sickness or allay storms. We have also
seen that the same power is present in the oko-ǰumu, and we have made
the important discovery that it is through contact with the spirits
that he acquires the power. This reveals another important principle.
(7) If an individual comes into contact with the power in any thing and
successfully avoids the danger of such contact, he becomes himself
endowed with power of the same kind as that with which he is in
contact. Now although the oko-ǰumu possesses a very special social
value, yet every man and woman has some social value, some of that
power which makes any being capable of affecting the society for good
or ill, and we can now see that the initiation ceremonies are the means
by which the individual is endowed with power (or, as the natives say,
made strong) by being brought into contact with the special power
present in each of the important kinds of food. The initiation of the
ordinary man or woman is parallel to the initiation of the oko-ǰumu
save that in one instance it is the power in foods and in the other
that in the spirits with which the initiation is concerned.

It has been held in this chapter that the society or the social life
itself is the chief source of protection against danger for the
individual. If this be so then the society itself possesses this same
power with which we are dealing, and we must expect to find that
contact with this power is also dangerous for the individual. Now the
occasion on which the individual comes into contact with the power in
the society is in the dance, and I found evidence that the natives
believe that dancing is dangerous in exactly the same way as eating
food. Confirmation of this will appear later.

It would seem that for the Andaman Islander the social life is a
process of complex interaction of powers or forces present in the
society itself, in each individual, in animals and plants and the
phenomena of nature, and in the world of spirits, and on these powers
the well-being of the society and its members depends. By the action of
the principle of opposition the society—the world of the living—comes
to be opposed to the spirits—the world of the dead. The society itself
is the chief source of protection to the individual; the spirits are
the chief source of danger. Hence all protection tends to be referred
to the society and all danger to the spirits. In the initiation
ceremonies it is the society that protects the initiate against the
dangers of food, and those dangers are referred, generally if not quite
consistently, to the spirits, with which at first sight they would seem
to have nothing to do.

It is now at last possible to understand the uses of the word ot-kimil
which were first discussed on page 267 above. When the word is used in
reference to a person who has just partaken of food it denotes a
condition of danger produced by contact with the power in foods. This
condition results at any time from the eating of any of the more
important foods, but is clearly produced in an extreme form when a food
such as turtle or pork is being eaten for the first time at a ceremony
of initiation. Hence the initiate is most intensely kimil and is
therefore addressed and spoken of by that term, or as we might say “the
kimil person.”

Used in reference to sickness the word denotes a condition of danger
due to contact with that power (in the spirits or in food) which is the
cause of sickness. Used in reference to storms it again denotes a
condition of danger for the society. Storms are sometimes said to be
caused by the spirits [177]. This is also the explanation of the use of
the word to denote a particular season of the year. The Kimil season is
by no means hot, but cool; it is, however, the season at which violent
cyclones are most likely to occur, being the period of the change from
the south-west to the north-east monsoon. It is therefore a season of
danger to the society from that power which produces storms.

Finally, a man who has joined in a dance is said to be ot-kimil and
seems to be regarded as being in a condition of danger similar to that
produced by food. It might be thought that in this instance the word is
only used in its literal meaning of “hot,” but I believe that this is
not so. The dance is the occasion on which the individual comes most
closely into contact with the power in the society itself, and I
believe that this contact is regarded as dangerous and therefore as
making the individual ot-kimil.

Thus we see that in its various uses the word ot-kimil denotes a
condition of danger due to contact with that power on the interaction
of the different manifestations of which the well-being of the society
depends.

How is it then that to denote this condition the Andamanese use a word
which, primarily, seems to mean “heat”? The answer is that they
conceive the qualities that give to objects their social values as
being the manifestations of a kind of energy, and as being similar to
the kind of energy which they know best, that of heat. The
psychological basis of this is not difficult to discover. The eating of
food is productive of bodily heat (the Andamanese live in a hot climate
and eat much fat, it must be remembered), so that the power present in
foods is inevitably thought of as a sort of heat or heat-producing
energy. In the dance the Andaman Islander experiences, as we have seen,
an increase in his own personal force or energy, and this also is
associated with the sensation of bodily heat produced by dancing. All
other bodily activities result in the sensation of heat (in hunting and
work of all kinds) and as it is in his activities that the social value
of the individual is manifested this value is itself conceived as a
sort of heat-producing energy. Further the Andamanese seem to associate
with the idea of heat all conditions of mental activity and excitement.
We ourselves do the same, as shown by such words as “ardour,” “zeal,”
etc. and such phrases as “the heat of anger, or enthusiasm,” and there
is good ground for thinking that all such associations or symbolisms
(sensory metaphors) have a physiological basis. Finally, fire which (as
we shall see better in the next chapter) is regarded by the Andamanese
as the most important possession of the society, and which (as we have
already seen) has in a very high degree the power that makes objects
capable of affecting the society, is for this reason in a suitable
position to become the archetype of all forms of energy, activity or
force. This system of notions of the Andamanese that the world is the
arena of a continual struggle of forces present in the society itself,
in each individual, in the substances that are used for foods and
materials, in fire, in storms and sunshine, and in the spirits and
bones of the dead, is, as I have tried to show, the result not of any
process of reasoning but of the immediate social experience, and as it
is in the heat of his own body, and in states of excitement of his own
mind, that the individual does actually experience the effects of these
forces upon himself he uses the same word to denote all conditions of
heat and all conditions of the manifestation of this energy, organising
around that word as well as he can his somewhat vague conceptions.

In case this symbolism should still seem strange, and the explanation
of it unsatisfactory, it is as well to show by means of a couple of
quotations that in other primitive societies differing widely from the
Andamanese similar uses of the words hot and heat are to be found. In
his work on the Achehnese (Vol. I, p. 305) C. Snouck Hurgronje writes
thus of the natives of the Malay Archipelago: “In the native language
of the E. Archipelago all happiness, rest and well-being are united
under the concept of ‘coolness,’ while the words ‘hot’ and ‘heat’
typify all the powers of evil. Thus when a person has either just
endured the attack of a ‘hot’ influence or has luckily contrived to
escape it, the adat prescribes methods of ‘cooling’ in order to confirm
him in the well-being which he has recovered or escaped losing. The
same methods are also adopted for charming away evil things and baneful
influences, the removal of which is regarded as an imperative
necessity. For instance, the completion of a house, and various
domestic festivities, are made the occasion for a process of ‘cooling’;
so also with a ship when newly built or after holding of a kanduri on
board; and before the padi is planted out the ground must be purified
from ‘hot’ or dangerous influences.” In this instance we find the word
“hot” used only in reference to evil forces. In the Andamans there is
no line drawn between good and evil forces. In spite of the differences
between them it is clear that the same mental process is responsible
for the symbolic use of the word “hot” in the Andamans and in the Malay
Archipelago.

In Codrington’s The Melanesians, p. 191, we find an example of the same
mode of thought. “That invisible power which is believed by the natives
to cause all such effects as transcend their conception of the regular
course of nature and to reside in spiritual beings, whether in the
spiritual part of living men or in the ghosts of the dead, being
imparted by them to their names and to various things that belong to
them, such as stones, snakes, and indeed objects of all sorts, is that
generally known as mana. By means of this men are able to control or
direct the forces of nature, to make rain or sunshine, wind or calm, to
cause sickness or remove it, to know what is far off in time and space,
to bring good luck or prosperity or to blast and curse. In the New
Hebrides, the Banks’ Islands, the Solomon Islands about Florida as in
New Zealand and many of the Pacific Islands the word in use is mana. In
Santa Cruz a different word malete is used, which bears however the
same meaning. At Saa in Malanta all persons and things in which this
supernatural power resides are said to be saka, that is, hot. Ghosts
that are powerful are saka; a man who has knowledge of the things which
have spiritual power is himself saka; one who knows a charm which is
saka mutters it over water, saru’e and makes the water ‘hot,’ ha’asaka.
The people of Mala Masiki, the lesser part of the island, which is cut
in two not far from its south-eastern end by a narrow channel, think
that the men of the larger part, Mala Paina, are very saka. If one of
these visiting the Saa people points with his finger, suisui, there is
danger of death or calamity; if one of them spits on a man he dies at
once.” Here again there are important differences, as might be expected
in such different cultures as those of Melanesia and the Andamans, and
yet it is clear that there is a fundamental similarity of mental
process.

The nature of this symbolic representation of the forces that affect
the social life may be made clear by considering another example. The
natives say that they use odu clay after eating because their bodies
give off an odour which would attract the spirits if they did not paint
themselves. The power of an object, by virtue of which it has what may
be called magical efficacy, is sometimes identified with its odour. A
number of the plants that are used as remedies for sickness, such as
the Trigonostemon, are possessed of strong and characteristic odours,
and the natives think that it is through the odour that they effect a
cure. Similarly the powerful properties attributed to the Anadendron,
whereby it will cause rheumatism, keep away sharks and spirits, and
turn turtle-meat bad, or stop a storm, are all said to be the results
of its “smell.” The stimulating power of olfactory sensations probably
has much to do with the development of these beliefs, but the
discussion of their psycho-physiological basis would lead us too far
away from the main subject, interesting as it would be.

In the jungles of the Andamans it is possible to recognize a distinct
succession of odours during a considerable part of the year as one
after another the commoner trees and lianas come into flower. When, for
example, the species of Sterculia called in the North Andaman ǰeru
comes into blossom, it is almost impossible to get away from the smell
of it except on the sea-shore when the wind is from the sea. Moreover
these various flowers give their scent to the honey that is made from
them, so that there is also a succession of differently flavoured kinds
of honey. The Andamanese have therefore adopted an original method of
marking the different periods of the year by means of the different
odoriferous flowers that are in bloom at different times. Their
calendar is a calendar of scents [178].

Now they seem to regard each flower-period as possessing its own
particular kind of force, of which the scent is the manifest sign, and
to think that the succession of these different forces produces the
succession of different fruits, the whole generative energy of nature
being conceived as the result not of one force but of many, following
one another in regular rotation. When a girl reaches puberty the
natives think of her as having blossomed as it were, the later ripening
being the birth of her children, and so she, like the plants of the
jungle, is under the influence of the same natural forces that produce
the successive blossoming and fruiting of the different species.
Therefore, when a girl reaches her blossoming time she is given, for a
name, to be used until she bears her fruit, the name of that particular
odoriferous plant that is in flower at the time, it being this
particular one of the successive forces of the forest life that has
brought her childhood to an end.

Under the influence of muscular exertion the human body gives off a
characteristic odour, of one generic kind, but differing somewhat in
every individual. The odour of the body, being the immediate result of
activity, may therefore well be regarded by the Andamanese as being
closely connected with the virtue or energy of the person. Further, the
eating of certain foods, such as dugong, turtle and pork, causes the
body of the Andaman Islander to give out a noticeable and recognizable
odour, different from that of mere perspiration. The natives themselves
seem to distinguish different odours for these different foods, but I
was not myself able to appreciate such differences. The Andamanese see
in this odour given off after eating a manifestation of the energy that
has been absorbed with the food, which energy it is that makes the food
both necessary for life and also a source of danger. This seems to be
the meaning of the belief that the spirits are attracted to a man by
the odour of the food he has eaten unless he paint himself with clay.

We can now at last return to the rite of painting the body with odu
clay after eating. I have suggested that the use of this clay in
mourning is a means by which the mourner marks the fact that he is in a
peculiar relation to the spirit-world, spirits being believed to be
light in colour. The mourner is in contact with the spirit-world
through his connection with the dead person, and to mark his condition
he paints himself to resemble the spirits, thereby affirming his
solidarity with them. The clay protects him from the danger that
results from any contact with the spirit-world. According to the rule
of method laid down at the beginning of the chapter we must find a
similar explanation of the use of odu after eating.

We have seen that it is the same kind of force in the spirits and in
the animals used for food that makes them both dangerous. Yet at the
same time there is a sense in which it is true that each kind of thing
has its own peculiar kind of force. The ceremony of turtle-eating
endows a youth with power to avoid the dangers of turtle but it does
not give him the power to avoid the dangers of pork. Hibiscus leaves
are efficacious against turtle, but against the pig Tetranthera leaves
must be used. In describing the patterns painted on the body after
eating it was stated that there is a tendency to connect particular
types of pattern with particular kinds of food. Thus a design commonly
used after eating turtle suggests the plates of the turtle’s carapace,
and a pattern used after eating pork similarly suggests the
longitudinal markings on the pig’s back. This would seem to indicate
that when a man has eaten turtle he paints himself so as to identify
himself with the animal he has eaten, and similarly with other foods,
just as in mourning he paints himself so as to identify himself with
the spirit-world. In other words, the painting of the body with odu
serves to show that there is a relation between the individual and some
source of power, which relation can best be described as one of
solidarity with the species, whether of animals or supernatural beings,
in which the power resides. The mourner is in contact with the
dangerous powers of the world of death, and by expressing his
solidarity with that world he avoids the dangers that might result from
his condition. For the fear of any being and a feeling of solidarity
towards that being are incompatible with one another. Similarly a man
who has eaten turtle is in contact with the power that resides in the
turtle species, a power that may be dangerous, but which when mastered
and made use of by proper precautions is a source of well-being, of
strength. By painting himself with a pattern that reminds him in some
way of the turtle he expresses his solidarity with the turtle species
and so obviates the dangers of his condition.

This interpretation is made more probable by the consideration of the
dances of the initiation ceremonies. In the dance at the turtle-eating
ceremony the movements of the dancers suggest the movements of a turtle
swimming. If the resemblance be not imaginary we may regard this as
another method of affirming the solidarity of the dancers with the
turtle species. We should then have to conclude that the dance at the
pig-eating ceremony is similarly imitative of the movements of a pig,
and though this is quite possible it is not so obvious.

This same kind of clay is used in the initiation ceremonies. At the
turtle-eating and pig-eating ceremonies it is spattered over the body
of the initiate from head to foot. I have no explanation to offer for
this peculiar method of application. After the ceremony is over the
initiate is painted with clay in a pattern called kimil-t’e̱ra-puli
which consists of a background of the clay on which a pattern of
separate spirals is made with the finger. The pattern is to be seen in
Plate XI. I cannot put forward with any confidence the explanation I
have to offer of this pattern, for I have no means of confirming it,
and it is therefore little more than a guess. It is that the spiral or
circle is a symbol of the camp and therefore of the society and the
social life in general, the basis of the symbolism being the roughly
circular or elliptical form of the village or communal hut, and the
circular form of the dance (more noticeable in the Little Andaman than
in the Great Andaman). If this be really the meaning of the symbol then
the explanation of its use in the initiation ceremonies would be that
in these ceremonies the youth is preserved from danger by the force
inherent in the society, which affords protection to all its members,
and the use of the symbol of the society would therefore be most
appropriate.

The act of painting the body with odu clay is therefore a rite which
advertises the fact that an individual is in intimate contact with some
source of that power which belongs to the things that affect the social
life, and it thereby serves to keep alive the sentiments associated
with that notion of power. The painting after eating reminds the
individual of his dependence upon and obligation towards the society,
and, since all join in the rite, it serves also to maintain the unity
of the community.

We may now return to the question of the meaning of personal ornament
in general. It is a commonplace of psychology that the development of
the sense of self is closely connected with the perception of one’s own
body. It is also generally recognized that the development of the moral
and social sentiments in man is dependent upon the development of
self-consciousness, of the sense of self. These two important
principles will help us to appreciate the hypothesis to which the
discussion has now led, that in the Andamans the customary regulation
of personal ornament is a means by which the society acts upon,
modifies, and regulates the sense of self in the individual.

There are three methods of ornamenting the body in the Andamans, (1) by
scarification, (2) by painting, and (3) by the putting on of ornaments.

The natives give two reasons for the custom of scarification, that it
improves the personal appearance and that it makes the boy or girl grow
up strong. Both these mean that scarification gives or marks an added
value. The explanation of the rite would therefore seem to be that it
marks the passage from childhood to manhood and is a means by which the
society bestows upon the individual that power, or social value, which
is possessed by the adult but not by the child. The individual is made
to feel that his value—his strength and the qualities of which he may
be proud—is not his by nature but is received by him from the society
to which he is admitted. The scars on his body are the visible marks of
his admission. The individual is proud or vain of the scars which are
the mark of his manhood, and thus the society makes use of the very
powerful sentiment of personal vanity to strengthen the social
sentiments.

Turning now to the painting of the body, we have seen that the pattern
of white clay serves to make both the painted individual and those who
see him feel his social value, and we have seen that this
interpretation explains the occasions on which such painting is used.
To complete the argument it is necessary to consider the occasions on
which the use of white clay is forbidden.

Those to whom this prohibition applies are (1) a youth or girl who is
aka-op, i.e., who is abstaining from certain foods during the
initiation period, (2) a mourner, (3) a homicide during the period of
isolation, and (4) a person who is ill. All these persons are excluded
from full participation in the active social life, and therefore the
social value of each of them is diminished. It would obviously be wrong
for a person in such a condition to express by decorating himself a
social value that he did not at the time possess.

The occasions on which this style of painting is used or forbidden are
thus all satisfactorily explained by our hypothesis. It remains to
consider the nature of the painting itself, and how far it is an
appropriate means of expression. To do this we must discuss very
briefly some of the processes of symbolic thought of the Andamanese.
Conditions of well-being (both individual and social) are associated in
the minds of the Andamanese with fine weather, both directly (through
physiological action) and indirectly (through the effect of fine
weather on the social life). Hence Tomo, who, as we shall see in the
next chapter, is a personification of fine weather, is a being who is
connected with goodness and happiness. With fine weather, and therefore
with individual and social well-being, the Andamanese associate
brightness and whiteness (for which they have only one word) and any
bright or light colour. The association of light and dark with euphoric
and dysphoric conditions respectively has a psycho-physical basis, for
it seems to be universal in human nature. Now the clay that the
Andamanese call to̱l-odu is the whitest substance they know, and is for
this reason fitted to be symbolical of conditions of well-being. Fine
weather is associated, in the minds of the Andamanese with honey,
because in the season of fine weather honey is plentiful, and is also
associated for a similar reason with snakes. Sweetness itself is
universally associated with pleasant things, again through a
psycho-physical link. The Andamanese believe in a special connection
between honey and a species of large snake called wara-ǰobo or or-čubi
[179], so that this snake comes to be representative of fine weather
and sweetness and therefore generally of states of well-being. Now,
throughout the Great Andaman the pattern in which white clay is painted
on the body is called after this snake, and the zig-zags of which the
pattern is composed may be supposed to be representative of the snake
itself. When, therefore, a man paints himself with white clay in a
pattern which he regards as representing the snake wara-ǰobo, it is
evident that the painting is meant to express a condition of
well-being, with which the snake itself, and whiteness, are, by a
number of links, closely associated. This is not all, however. The
Andamanese, we may not doubt, derive from the painted pattern an
esthetic pleasure due to its rhythmical character, its shape as an
arrangement of lines and spaces. Further it provides the pleasure that
we obtain from a thing elegantly and skilfully made, and this explains
why so much care is taken in the making of the pattern. This pleasure
at what we may call the beauty of the pattern heightens the effect
produced by its symbolic references. The real value of the pattern, its
pleasure-giving quality, is transferred to the man on whose body it is
executed. He himself is pleased with it, proud of it, and so becomes
pleased with and proud of himself, for the pattern by being imprinted
on his body becomes part of him. The sense of self attaches to it, as
with us the sense of self attaches to our clothes.

It would be interesting to carry the analysis of the mental processes
involved in all this a stage or two further, but enough has been said,
I hope, to show that the nature of the painting with clay is
appropriate to its use as marking or expressing value.

Patterns are sometimes painted with this same white clay on the face
alone, such patterns being built up either of the zig-zags of the snake
pattern, or of rhythmically arranged series of short lines. The use of
such paintings is regulated by a sort of etiquette. By so having his
face decorated a man expresses that he is pleased with himself, and
obviously there are occasions on which it is appropriate and others on
which it is inappropriate that he should feel thus. A man who has been
successful in the day’s hunting, for example, is quite justified in
having his face ornamented in this way, and it is on such occasions as
this that the custom is observed.

When a man is painted for a dance, or on any other ceremonial occasion,
with white clay, he is also painted at the same time with red paint. In
these instances we must suppose that the red paint serves the same
purpose as the pattern of white clay with which it is combined, namely
to make the decorated person pleasantly aware of his or her social
value. Red paint is also used, however, in sickness, and on other
occasions, as affording protection against evil, particularly evil from
the spirit-world.

This double use of red paint is to be explained by reference to the
colour symbolism of the Andaman Islanders. For them the colour red is
pre-eminently the colour of blood and of fire. There is ample evidence
of this which it is perhaps not necessary to state. Now blood is
identified with the warmth of the body and with life; the blood and the
fat are sometimes spoken of as the two vital principles. Fire, as I
have already shown, is taken as a symbol of activity and of mental
excitement. Thus the colour comes to be associated in the minds of the
Andamanese with all euphoric conditions, with excitement, vitality,
mental and bodily activity, and with energy or force in general. It is
possible that this symbolism, which seems to be much the same in all
divisions of mankind, has a psycho-physical basis in the stimulating
dynamogenic power of sensations of redness.

When a person is sick he is in need of vitality, of energy, and so his
body is daubed with the red paint that is a symbol of the things that
he needs, and by a simple mental process he comes to believe that by
applying the paint to his body he increases his energy and vitality,
and so helps himself to get rid of the sickness. At a dance, or on
other ceremonial occasions, it is required that the individual shall
have a sense of his own value, and for this he must experience that
sense of personal force and vitality that is produced, as we have seen,
by the action of the dance. This effect is reinforced by the use of the
red paint which is the symbol of that condition of energy and vitality
that it is (for some special reason) necessary for him to feel. As the
value of the individual depends upon his strength or force, the red
paint is thus a suitable means of expressing the value of him on whose
body it is painted, and really expresses, though by different means,
exactly the same thing as the pattern of white clay with which it is
combined.

We are now in a position to understand the use of white clay and red
paint in the purification of a homicide. This takes place at the end of
a period of isolation, during which the man is entirely cut off from
the social life, and lives in a condition of supposed extreme danger on
account of the blood that he has shed. During this time he may not use
his hands to touch food, and at the end his hands are purified by the
application to them of red paint and white clay. It is clearly because
these two substances are both of them in different ways symbols of
conditions of well-being that magical virtue is ascribed to their use
in this instance. It is perhaps worth while to recall that both red
ochre and white clay are sometimes given internally as remedies against
sickness.

For the sake of the argument it has been necessary to separate the two
motives underlying the use of personal ornament, the desire for
protection and the desire for display. But we now see that these two
motives are very intimately related and are really both involved in
every kind of ornament. All ornament in some way marks the relation of
the individual to the society and to that force or power in the society
to which he owes his well-being and happiness. When painting or
ornament is used to give protection, it is, as we have seen, the
protective power of the society itself that is appealed to, and what is
expressed is the dependence of the individual on the society. When
ornament or paint is used for display it is again the dependence on the
society that is expressed, though in a different way and on occasions
of a different kind. We have seen that scarification is also a means of
marking the dependence of the individual on the society, and it is very
important to note that the Andamanese sometimes explain it as due to
the desire for display and sometimes to the need of protection
(enabling the child to grow strong and so avoid the dangers of
sickness), showing very clearly that there is some intimate connection
between these two motives, or at any rate that one and the same method
of ornamentation can satisfy both. There is the further example of red
paint, which is combined with the pattern of white clay for purposes of
display, and is also constantly used in many ways as affording
protection.

We are thus brought to the final conclusion that the scarification and
painting of the body and the wearing of most if not all of the
customary ornaments are rites which have the function of marking the
fact that the individual is in a particular permanent or temporary
relation to that power in the society and in all things that affect the
social life, the notion of which we have seen to underlie so much of
the Andaman ceremonial.

The scarification of a boy or girl leaves permanent marks of the
permanent relation between the adult and the society. By means of it
and the initiation ceremonies that follow or accompany it, and of which
it may really be considered to be a part, the society gives the
individual his social value, of which the scars remain as a visible
sign for him to be proud of, and at the same time endows him with the
power to avoid the dangers with which his life is beset.

The paintings of clay after food mark the temporary relation between
the individual and the power present in the food he has eaten. It is
chiefly thought of by the natives themselves as protective, as we have
seen, but it also gives an opportunity for the exercise of personal
vanity, for much care is taken in the designing and execution of the
pattern, which therefore affords the painted individual much the same
sort of satisfaction as the snake pattern of white clay. It calls his
attention to his own appearance, and makes him feel pleased or
satisfied with himself, conscious of his own personal value. A
condition of unity and harmony is produced in the community by a feast
as well as by a dance, and in each instance that harmony is expressed
by the painting of every member with the same material in a similar
design. The relation of the individual to the society is made visible
on his body. By means of the paintings after food the society not only
protects itself from danger but also rejoices in the well-being that is
produced by a supply of relished food. Inversely it can now also be
shown that the painting of white clay and red paint worn at a dance and
after marriage and initiation is not only a means of display but is
also protective. Both red paint and white clay are used to give
protection in sickness, and they are similarly used in the purification
of the hands of a homicide. Moreover we have seen, in reference to the
word ot-kimil, that the dance is a condition of danger by reason of the
contact it involves between the individual and the power of the
society. The few days following an initiation ceremony are definitely
believed to be a period of danger for the initiate, and during this
time the pattern of white clay and red paint must not be washed off but
must be allowed to wear off. By the time the last traces of the pattern
have disappeared the danger is considered to be over. There is evidence
that the first few days of marriage are regarded as a period of danger.
It would seem that the natives do attribute to the painting with white
clay and red paint some power of protection, but this is hidden under
the importance of such painting as a means of display.

Of the various ornaments that are worn on the body some would seem to
be worn almost solely for purposes of display, because they are
pleasing to the eye. Such are the necklaces and other ornaments of
small shells. It would seem that the same motive is also responsible
for the use of the yellow skin of the Dendrobium of which the
Andamanese are so fond. The ornaments of netting and shell seem to be
worn primarily for display, but it is quite possible that some
protective power is attributed to them, as to the paintings of white
clay with which they are regularly worn. The belts of Pandanus leaf
that are worn by women are a mark of the sex, and the style of belt
worn differs with the social status of the woman. They thus serve to
exhibit the special social value of the woman in so far as it depends
upon her sex and her social status, but I believe that the Andamanese
attribute to the belt and to the apron of leaves worn with it a power
of protection against the special dangers to which women are believed
to be subject. This is suggested by the use of the Pandanus leaf in the
ceremony at a girl’s first menstruation [180]. I failed to discover any
special ideas connected with the ornaments of Pandanus leaf that are
sometimes worn by both men and women at dances. The ornaments that are
worn primarily for their protective power are those made of human and
animal bones and those of pieces of canes or of fibres of Hibiscus or
Ficus. These are always made decorative by the addition of shells and
yellow Dendrobium skin, and therefore besides their primary function
also serve as means of display.

It is clear then that in the various methods of ornamenting the body
the two chief motives that we have considered are so combined that they
can hardly be estimated separately, and it is this mingling of motives
that has led us to the final understanding of the meaning and social
function of bodily ornament. Each of the different kinds of ornament
serves to make manifest the existence of some special relation between
the individual and the society, and therefore of some special relation
between him and that system of powers on which the welfare of the
society and of the individual depends. One of the most important
aspects of the relation of the individual to the society is his
dependence upon it for his safety and well-being and this is revealed
in all painting and ornament worn for protection. But the society not
only protects the individual from danger; it is the direct source of
his well-being; and this makes itself felt in the customary regulation
by which the use of the more important ornaments used for display is
confined to occasions on which it is quite clear that his happiness is
directly due to the society, such as a dance or feast. Thus the customs
relating to the ornamentation of the body are of the kind that I have
here called ceremonial. They are means by which the society exercises
on appropriate occasions some of the important social sentiments,
thereby maintaining them at the necessary degree of energy required to
maintain the social cohesion.

To complete the discussion of ornament in general it is necessary to
refer very briefly to the ornamentation of objects such as bows, canoes
and baskets. Such ornamentation consists of (1) incised patterns (on
bows, etc.), which may be compared with the scarification of the body,
(2) painting with red paint and white clay (bows, canoes, skulls,
etc.), or with prepared wax (Nautilus shell cups, etc.), (3) patterns
made with the yellow skin of the Dendrobium (baskets, etc.), and (4)
shells attached by thread (baskets, baby-sling, etc.). The important
point to note is that the decoration applied to utensils is of the same
character throughout as that which, when applied to the body, has been
shown to be an expression of the social value of the person. Thus the
pattern painted on a canoe with white clay and red paint is the same as
that on the body of a dancer. It would seem, therefore, that the
ornamentation of utensils is a means of expressing or marking the
social value of the decorated object, and it might even be held that
the application of ornament to utensils is really a matter of
ceremonial. Just as a newly married man is painted with the snake
pattern which wears off and is not renewed, so a new canoe or a new
South Andaman bow is painted with the same pattern as soon as it is
finished, and after this pattern wears off it is not renewed. It is the
act of bringing a new canoe or bow into use that is the occasion of the
ceremonial expression of its value, if we may so regard the painting. A
new relation is established between the society and an object, which
thereby acquires a special social value, just as a youth acquires a
special new social value at the conclusion of one of the initiation
ceremonies. This example is sufficient to show that at least there is
nothing in the ornamentation of utensils that conflicts with the
explanation of bodily ornament given in this chapter [181].

It is time to bring the argument to a conclusion. It should now, I
hope, be evident that the ceremonial customs of the Andaman Islands
form a closely connected system, and that we cannot understand their
meaning if we only consider each one by itself, but must study the
whole system to arrive at an interpretation. This in itself I regard as
a most important conclusion, for it justifies the contention that we
must substitute for the old method of dealing with the customs of
primitive people,—the comparative method by which isolated customs from
different social types were brought together and conclusions drawn from
their similarity,—a new method by which all the institutions of one
society or social type are studied together so as to exhibit their
intimate relations as parts of an organic system.

I have tried to show that the ceremonial customs are the means by which
the society acts upon its individual members and keeps alive in their
minds a certain system of sentiments. Without the ceremonial those
sentiments would not exist, and without them the social organisation in
its actual form could not exist. There is great difficulty, however, in
finding a suitable method of describing these sentiments. In attempting
to put into precise words the vague feelings of the Andaman Islander
there is always the danger that we may attribute to him conceptions
that he does not possess. For he is not himself capable of thinking
about his own sentiments.

In the attempt to exhibit the meaning of the ceremonial I have shown
that it implies a complex system of beliefs about what I have called
power, and have stated those beliefs in more or less precise terms. But
the Andaman Islander is of course quite incapable of making similar
statements or even of understanding them. In his consciousness appear
only the very vaguest conceptions, such as those associated with the
word kimil or with odours. We, in order to understand his customs must
substitute for such vague notions others capable of precise statement,
must formulate in words the beliefs that are revealed in his actions,
but we must be careful not to fall into the error of attributing to him
the conceptions by which we make clear to ourselves his indefinite
sentiments and notions and the ceremonies in which they are expressed.

With this qualification, then, the ceremonial of the Andaman Islands
may be said to involve the assumption of a power of a peculiar kind,
and we have been able to formulate certain principles which, although
the native is quite incapable of stating them as principles, are
revealed in the ceremonial. This power, though in itself neither good
nor evil, is the source of all good and all evil in human life. It is
present in the society itself and in everything that can affect in
important ways the social life. All occasions of special contact with
it are dangerous, i.e., are subject to ritual precautions.

It should already, from the course of the argument, be plain that this
power or force, the interaction of whose different manifestations
constitutes the process of social life, is not imaginary, is not even
something the existence of which is surmised as the result of
intellectual processes, but is real, an object of actual experience. It
is, in a few words, the moral power of the society acting upon the
individual directly or indirectly and felt by him in innumerable ways
throughout the whole course of his life [182].

One of the most important ways in which the individual experiences the
moral force of the society of which he is a member is through the
feeling of moral obligation, which gives him the experience of a power
compelling him to subordinate his egoistic desires to the demands of
social custom. The individual feels this force acting upon him both
from outside and from inside himself. For he recognizes that it is the
society with its traditions and customs that constrains him through the
force of public opinion, and yet the conflict between customary duty
and selfish inclination takes place in his own mind and is experienced
as the clash of antagonistic mental forces. The moral sense within
impels towards the same end as the social opinion without.

This force of moral obligation is felt not only in relation to right
and wrong conduct towards other persons, but is also felt in all
ritual, whether negative or positive.

The moral force of the society is also felt, in a quite different way,
in all states of intense collective emotion, of which the dance affords
a good example. I have shown how in the dance the individual feels the
society acting upon him, constraining him to join in the common
activity and regulate his actions to conform with those of others, and,
when he so acts in harmony with them, giving him the experience of a
great increase of his own personal force or energy. All ceremonies in
which the whole community takes part give the individual the experience
of the moral force of the society acting upon him in somewhat the same
way as the dance.

Thus in these and other ways the individual does experience the action
of the society upon himself as a sort of force, not however as a
physical force, but as a moral force, acting directly in his own mind
and yet clearly felt as something outside his own self, and with which
that self may be in conflict.

How is it, then, that this force comes to be projected into the world
of nature? The answer to that question, which can only be very briefly
indicated here, is to be found in the conclusions at which we have
arrived with regard to social values. The moral force of the society is
experienced by the individual not only directly but also as acting upon
him indirectly through every object that has social value. The best
example of this process is found in the things used for food. Thus, in
the Andamans, food is very closely connected with the feeling of moral
obligation, as we have seen. Further, food is one of the principal
sources of those alternations of social euphoria and dysphoria in
which, through the action of the collective emotion, the individual
experiences the action of the society upon his own well-being. When
food is plentiful happiness spreads through the community and the time
is spent in dancing and feasting so that the individual feels a great
increase in his own personal force coming to him from the society or
from the food. On the other hand, when food is scarce and hunting
unsuccessful the community feels itself thwarted and restrained and
experiences a sense of weakness, which collective feeling has for its
immediate object the food the lack of which is its origin.

Similarly with the phenomena of the weather and all other objects that
have social value, they are all associated in the mind of the
individual with his experience of the action of the society upon
himself, so that the moral force of the society is actually felt as
acting through them.

But it is really through the ceremonial that this is mainly brought
about. It is in the initiation ceremonies that the moral force of the
society acting through foods is chiefly felt, and the same experience
is repeated in a less intense form in the rite of painting the body
after food. It is similarly through the protective use of the materials
used for weapons and through the various ritual prohibitions connected
with them that the moral force of the society acting through them is
chiefly felt. The argument has been that it is by means of the
ceremonial that the individual is made to feel the social value of the
various things with which the ceremonial is concerned. Putting this in
other words we can now define the ceremonial as the means by which the
individual is made to feel the moral force of the society acting upon
him either directly, or in some instances indirectly through those
things that have important effects on the social life. By its action
upon the individual the ceremonial develops and maintains in existence
in his mind an organised system of dispositions by which the social
life, in the particular form it takes in the Andamans, is made
possible, using for the purpose of maintaining the social cohesion all
the instinctive tendencies of human nature, modifying and combining
them according to its needs.

As an example of such modification of primary instincts let us briefly
consider that of fear, to which, from the time of Petronius [183] to
the present day, so much importance has been attributed in relation to
the origin of religion. In childhood any fear of danger makes the child
run to its mother or father for protection, and thus the instinct of
fear becomes an important component of that feeling of dependence that
the child has towards its parents. The primitive society uses the fear
instinct in much the same way. The Andaman Islander, through the
ceremonies and customs of his people, is made to feel that he is in a
world full of unseen dangers,—dangers from the foods he eats, from the
sea, the weather, the forest and its animals, but above all from the
spirits of the dead,—which can only be avoided by the help of the
society and by conformity with social custom. As men press close to one
another in danger, the belief in and fear of the spirit-world make the
Andaman Islander cling more firmly to his fellows, and make him feel
more intensely his own dependence on the society to which he belongs,
just as the fear of danger makes the child feel its dependence upon its
parents. So the belief in the spirit-world serves directly to increase
the cohesion of the society through its action on the mind of the
individual. An important law of sociology is that the solidarity of a
group is increased when the group as a whole finds itself opposed to
some other group; so, enmity between two tribes or nations increases
the solidarity of each; and so also, the antagonism between the society
of the living and the world of the dead increases the solidarity of the
former.

The argument is now concluded. I have examined, as fully as space would
permit, all the more important features of the Andaman ceremonial, and
have tried to show what part they play in the social life of the
Andamans. At the end of our enquiry it is well to ask if any definition
of ceremonial can be given more exact than the vague one with which we
started. The chapter has shown that what I have denoted as ceremonial
consists of (1) collective actions, (2) required by custom, (3)
performed on occasions of changes in the course of social life, and (4)
expressing the collective sentiments relating to such social change. By
the first part of the definition we exclude the magical practices of
the medicine-men, which however it has been convenient to consider in
connection with the ceremonial, as it has helped us to understand some
of the ideas underlying both magic and ceremonial. If we are not to
exclude the rite of painting after eating food we must regard the
obtaining of a good supply of food as being a change in the course of
social life even though it occurs very frequently, and even every day
for weeks together. It must be admitted, however, that the definition
does not give us any very clear dividing line between ceremonial and
art, play, or morals. The painting of the body with white clay after
marriage or initiation must, I think, be regarded as ceremonial, while
the painting of a new bow or canoe with the same clay in the same
pattern should perhaps more conveniently be called art. But what are we
to say of the painting worn at a dance or the face-painting that a man
occasionally wears when there is no special reason? The dance at the
end of mourning is clearly a ceremony, but can we say the same of the
ordinary dance after a successful hunt? And if it be not ceremonial,
shall we call it art or play? When friends are required to give
presents to a newly-married couple are we to call this obligation one
of ceremonial, of etiquette or of morals? These and similar questions
are perhaps incapable of a satisfactory answer, nor does it seem
necessary to attempt to find one. Those elements of culture that we now
differentiate and call by different names were, in primitive societies,
undifferentiated and not clearly to be distinguished from one another,
and a striving after too great a precision of definition in dealing
with such a culture as that of the Andamans leads, I think, not to a
clearer understanding, but to the opposite. The main thing is to keep
close to the facts. In this chapter I have examined a number of facts
which are plainly related and the question of how we are to label them
is one that may well be left till such time as we shall have acquired a
more profound insight into the nature of culture in general and the
complex forces involved in its existence and growth. For the present,
some vagueness in our provisional classifications need not greatly
perturb us.








CHAPTER VI

THE INTERPRETATION OF ANDAMANESE CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS: MYTHS AND LEGENDS


In the last chapter I tried to explain, by reference to psychological
principles, the more important ritual and ceremonial observances of the
Andamanese; in the present chapter I shall deal in a similar manner
with the legends recorded in Chapter IV. That is to say, I propose to
explain, not how the legends arose, but what they mean, what part they
play at the present time in the mental life of the Andaman Islander.
Customs that seem at first sight meaningless or ridiculous have been
shown to fulfil most important functions in the social economy, and
similarly I hope to prove that the tales that might seem merely the
products of a somewhat childish fancy are very far indeed from being
merely fanciful and are the means by which the Andamanese express and
systematise their fundamental notions of life and nature and the
sentiments attaching to those notions.

I propose to analyse a few of the more important legends, and will
begin with the Akar-Bale story of the origin of night and day [184].
The explanation of this story depends on the connection of day and
night with the cicada. This species of cicada, of which I do not know
the scientific name, always makes a noise (“sings” as the natives say)
during the short interval of twilight between sunset and darkness and
between dawn and sunrise. It is possible that individual insects of the
species make a noise at other times of the day and night, but I do not
remember to have heard them, and it is only at the beginning and end of
the day that they are all to be heard singing together. The song of the
cicada, as day gives place to night and as night changes to day is one
of the most familiar of all natural phenomena to the Andamanese.
Another fact that is made use of in the legend is that if one of these
insects be crushed as was the cicada of the story, or even if it be
taken up in the hand, it will utter its shrill and plaintive note, not
unlike the cry of a human being in pain. Finally, fully to understand
the tale, it is necessary to remember that in all the tribes of the
Great Andaman Division there is a prohibition against killing the
cicada. The meaning of this prohibition will have to be discussed in
connection with the legend.

The facts stated above enable us to understand what may be called the
skeleton of the legend. One of the ancestors killed a cicada (a
forbidden act), the cicada uttered its cry (as it does when hurt), and
as a result, darkness covered the world (as it always does when the
cicada sings in the evening). Leaving aside, for the present, the rest
of the story, we may try to make clear to ourselves just what this part
of it expresses. The explanation that I propose is to the effect that
the legend is simply an expression or a statement of the “social value”
of the phenomenon of the alternation of day and night. By the social
value of anything I mean, as explained in the last chapter, the way in
which that thing affects the life of the society (either beneficially
or adversely) and therefore the way in which it affects the social
sentiments of the individuals who compose the society. There is no need
to discuss at length and in all its bearings, the way in which the
alternation of day and night affects the social life of the Andamanese.
The one outstanding feature of first importance is that the day is the
time of social activity whereas the night is a period when the society
is, as a rule, not active. It was shown in the last chapter that one of
the most important elements in the mental complex revealed by a study
of the ceremonial is the recognition of the fact that it is on the
activity of the society that the individual depends for his security
and well-being. So long as he can feel that he is an active member of
an active community the individual feels that he has for his support
(morally and physically) a great force on which he can rely. If, for
any reason, he is temporarily cut off from the society and from
participation in its life, he is in a position of insecurity, and
believes himself to be in danger from the powers of the world of
spirits. It is an inevitable result of this that the daytime, when the
society is active, should be felt to be a period of comparative
security, while the night, when all social activity ceases, should be
felt to be a period of comparative insecurity. That the day and night
are so regarded is shown in the belief of the natives that the spirits
are more to be dreaded during the night than during the day.

The Andaman Islander, like many other savages, is afraid of the dark.
It might perhaps be thought that this fear is immediate and
instinctive, a result of the physiology of the human nervous system,
but that, I think, would be a false assumption. Many infants would seem
not to be at first afraid of darkness, but to learn to fear it, as they
learn to fear many other things. It is not possible here to enter into
a discussion of the matter, but I would hold that in the Andaman
Islanders and probably in other savages, the fear of darkness, of
night, is a secondary or induced feeling, not by any means instinctive,
and is in large part due to the social sentiments, to the fact that at
night the social life ceases. The savage feels, and rightly so, that
for everything he has and is, for the safety and well-being of his body
and the comfort of his soul, he depends on the communal life in which
his own life is merged. When, at the close of day, the social life
ceases, he feels, should anything occur to direct his attention to his
own condition, less secure than when the social life is proceeding
actively around him [185].

The interpretation that I would offer of the Akar-Bale legend is that
it is an expression of these sentiments relating to the night, an
expression that takes advantage of the connection between the song of
the cicada and the alternation of night and day. One feature of the
manner of expression will be explained later in the chapter, namely
that it takes the form of a story relating to a mythical period of the
past. For the present the necessity of this particular form must be
accepted as a postulate. Granting this it remains only to show that the
legend does express the social value of night as defined above.

The fear of night, or rather, since that fear is rarely more than
potential, the feeling that night is a time of insecurity, is part of
the general attitude of fear or respect towards the forces of nature
that are believed to be possible sources of danger to the society. Now
it has been shown that this particular attitude to nature finds
expression in ritual prohibitions of various kinds. For instance, the
Andaman Islander translates his feeling of the social value of food
substances into the belief that such things must be treated with ritual
precautions. Applying this to the case before us, we must first
recognize that to the Andaman Islander the alternation of day and night
and the singing of the cicada are not separate phenomena but are two
parts or aspects of one and the same recurring event. Now, the night
and the day are things that cannot be handled, i.e., cannot be
immediately subject to the actions of human beings, while the cicada
can be handled. Hence it is to the cicada that the need of precaution
is referred. Any interference with the cicada is forbidden, and this
prohibition serves as a mark or expression of the social value of that
alternation of night and day with which the cicada is so intimately
associated [186].

The legend of the Akar-Bale tribe is simply an elaboration of this
theme. In the beginning there was no night, no darkness. Social life
was continuous and was not subject to periods of diminished intensity.
Then one of the ancestors (apparently in a fit of temper owing to his
lack of success in fishing) crushed a cicada, and the cry of the insect
brought darkness upon the world. The darkness, with its inhibition of
activity, is clearly regarded as an evil, i.e., as a manifestation of
force hostile to the society, and this accords with the definition of
the social value of night given above, where it was shown that this
value is negative, that night is a source of social dysphoria.

This interpretation is confirmed by the statements about the night made
in the North Andaman (where this legend does not seem to exist), such
as that the night is made by the spirits (Lau) who draw a mat or cloth
across the sky. When we remember that the spirits are the embodiment of
the forces hostile to the society we see how this statement expresses
the feeling that night is the time when such hostile forces are in the
ascendant.

The Akar-Bale story, besides giving an account of the origin of night,
relates the invention of singing and dancing. There is no specific
reference to dancing in the story as recorded from my Akar-Bale
informant. The reference is found, however, in the version recorded by
Mr Man [187] and it is implicit even in the Akar-Bale version. Dancing
is always accompanied by a song, and every song is composed with the
express intention of being sung at a dance. Thus, for the Andamanese,
singing and dancing are merely two aspects of one and the same
activity.

Dancing, except on a few special ceremonial occasions, always takes
place at night. Night, as we have seen, is a source of social
dysphoria. It prevents the pursuit of the common social activities,
such as hunting or making canoes or weapons. The condition produced by
darkness can be neutralised by means of singing and dancing, the dance
being a condition of intense social euphoria, in which social activity
is at its maximum, and all the social sentiments are pleasurably and
intensely excited.

This belief that dancing and singing are means by which the evil
influence of darkness can be overcome is shown in the custom observed
when a corpse remains in a camp all night, of sitting round it and
singing, in order (so the natives say) to keep away the spirits that
have caused the death. They do not dance, because the pleasurable
excitement of the more intense activity would be incompatible with the
condition naturally resulting from a death. This custom affords clear
evidence that singing, and in a yet higher degree the combined activity
of singing and dancing, possess magical efficacy against the dangers
prevalent at night.

This relation between the (negative) social value of night and the
(positive) social value of dancing and singing is simply and clearly
expressed in the legend. It was the “singing” of the cicada that
produced the darkness. The ancestors, finding themselves overwhelmed
with darkness, set to work to remedy this evil by singing (and, it is
to be presumed, by dancing to the song). One after another they sang a
song, just as at a dance one man after another sings until he is tired.
Finally, after the dance had gone on for a number of hours, Ko̱ŋoro took
his turn at singing and the night came to an end and day appeared. So
effectual was the means adopted of neutralising the evils of darkness
that it finally resulted in the return of the daylight in which
ordinary social life is possible.

The reference to resin in the legend can be easily understood. The
Andamanese use resin to provide the light by which they dance, as well
as for torches for fishing on dark nights. It is their only artificial
light, and without resin a dance would be a very poor affair. Thus the
social value of resin is that it affords a means of neutralising to a
certain extent the effects of darkness.

These are, I think, all the essential elements of the story. One of the
ancestors, under the influence of an anti-social passion, killed a
cicada, which uttered its cry, and thereupon the world was covered with
darkness. The ancestors then made torches of resin which enabled them
to neutralise the darkness to some extent. They then invented dancing
and singing and after they had continued for a number of hours the
light came back. Since that time day and night regularly alternate with
one another, and the cicada sings at each period of change. Men have
learnt how to use resin for artificial light, and how to remedy the
effects of darkness by dancing and singing.

The legend is thus simply the expression in a particular form of the
relation between the society and a certain natural phenomenon in terms
of what have been called social values. We find expressed the social
values of night and of resin and dancing. It may be noted that the
legend also gives a special social value to the ancestors, different
from and greater than that of men or women at the present day. The
ancestors of the Andamanese were able to do many things that men cannot
do now; they were able to affect the processes of nature in a way that
is no longer possible. This notion of the social value of the
ancestors, of the past, will be shown to be one of the most important
elements in the legends, it being this that is responsible for the
general form of the stories. The consideration of this subject,
however, must be postponed.

There are still a number of points of the legend that have not been
considered. It is not easy to account for the inclusion in this story
of the discovery of the yam. It is possible that there is some ground
of association between the yam and the cicada, but I do not certainly
know of any such. There is a legend recorded by Mr Man from the Aka-Bea
tribe, and given above [188], in which an account is given of the lucky
discovery of the first yam by the chance shooting of an arrow. It is
therefore quite likely that the yam story first existed quite
independently, and that it has become incorporated in the legend of the
origin of night on account of the fact that the incident of the
shooting of an arrow was found in both of them.

There is one reason for the inclusion of the yam incident that it is
worth while to note. By its means it is told how Da Teŋat discovered a
new object of each of the three kinds—animal, vegetable, and mineral.
The new animal was the cicada, the new vegetable was the yam, and the
new mineral was the resin, which, as the story shows, the natives
classify as a “stone,” although they know its vegetable origin. The
story is thus rounded off and given an air of completeness and
symmetry.

The incident of the shooting of the three arrows is of some interest as
giving us an idea of how the Andamanese think of chance or luck.
Arrows, it must be remembered, are regarded as being possessed of
magical power. Further, the ancestors themselves possessed powers that
do not belong to living men, as is shown repeatedly in the legends. The
ancestor shoots an arrow, and, by reason of his power and that of the
arrow, it strikes an important object and leads him to a discovery. The
mere striking of the object by the arrow seems to give him a certain
degree of power over the object, whereby he forces it to reveal its
name. (We have already seen, by a reference to this very story, that
there is an important connection between the name of an object and its
social value [189].) Thus, in common with other primitive peoples, the
Andaman Islanders regard what we call luck or chance as due to the
action of the magical powers possessed by objects and by human beings.

There is one point that is not very plain in the Akar-Bale version, but
I think we must take it that Da Teŋat was disgusted at his lack of
success in fishing. His irritation was not diminished but rather
increased by the fact that he did succeed in procuring one small and
worthless fish. His shooting of the arrows must be regarded, I think,
as the result of his anger. He might be supposed to address his arrows
as follows: “You have not succeeded in hitting any fish at which I
aimed you; let me see if you can hit anything on your own account, when
I take no aim.” In this way he was led to the discovery of the yam, the
resin and the cicada, for though it is not explicit, it is evident that
it was the third arrow that led him to the cicada. His irritation was
not yet appeased however, and he crushed the cicada, thus bringing
darkness over the world. We must infer that he was aware of what he was
doing, for as soon as he had discovered the yam and the resin he learnt
their names and thereby learnt all there was to know about them and
their properties, and we must suppose that he similarly learnt the name
of the cicada, and that to injure it would cause darkness. In the
Aka-Bea legend recorded by Mr Man it is expressly stated that the
ancestors who performed the actions that led to the first darkness did
so because they were annoyed by the continuous heat of the sun [190].

Now we have here a very important feature of the legend which it will
not do to overlook. We shall find that it is a principle of the Andaman
legends that evil results follow from evil actions. Night, which, by
reason of its negative social value, is regarded as an evil, is shown
to be the result of the misbehaviour of one of the ancestors in giving
way to anti-social feelings of anger or annoyance. It is a case of like
producing like. When an individual gives way to such feelings as anger
he becomes a source of danger to the society, or at any rate a source
of social dysphoria by disturbing the harmony of the community. Thus,
in the legend, it was the wickedness of the ancestor in giving way to
his feeling of irritation that led to the social disaster. Inversely,
it was through the combined effort of the ancestors joining in a
harmonious action (singing and dancing) that the day was brought back.

The events of the legend are supposed to have taken place at a spot
named Golugma. I only visited this spot once and did not take
particular note of it, nor have I information about the position it
occupied in the social life of that part of the island in former times.
We do know, however, from the name Golugma Bud, that at one time it was
the site of a communal hut and was therefore an important camping
place. It may have been a place at which dance-meetings were frequently
held, and this would be a sufficient reason for its selection as the
legendary site of the first dance.

One of the minor motives of the Akar-Bale version of this story is the
identity of the ancestor who appears as the chief actor. I regret to
say that I have never found the exact meaning of the word teŋat. Though
I asked the natives to bring me a specimen they did not do so. It is
probably either a species of spider or of ant. However, even if I had
succeeded in identifying the teŋat, it is possible that I should not
have discovered the reason why this particular creature was selected as
the hero of the story. This can be shown by considering another of the
incidents of the story. All the ancestors who sang and tried to bring
back the day failed except the ko̱ŋoro. This is a species of small red
ant. Whenever I heard this story told or referred to, this particular
incident (the successful singing of ko̱ŋoro) caused great amusement
amongst the listeners. It was obvious that it was a good joke. Yet in
spite of my endeavours on more than one occasion I was unable to see
what the joke was.

In the A-Pučikwar version of the same legend [191] it was Pe̱tie, the
monitor lizard, who crushed the cicada and brought darkness. This is to
be explained not on the basis of any particular characteristic of the
lizard, but as being due to the position that this animal occupies in
the A-Pučikwar mythology in general as the first ancestor of the
Andamanese. As the first progenitor he is made responsible for the
origin of all sorts of things. The story of the origin of night must
have a chief actor, and in the absence of any important ground for
selecting any other of the ancestors the A-Pučikwar story-teller falls
back on the monitor lizard.

In the above analysis I have drawn a distinction between what may be
called major and minor motives of the story. The validity of the
interpretation of the legends offered in this chapter depends on the
validity of this distinction, and it is therefore important to provide
a method by which we can separate major from minor motives. This can
only be done when there are several versions of the same legend. Major
motives may be defined as those which appear in all the versions of one
legend, while minor motives are those which may vary from one version
to another without producing any fundamental change in the legend
itself. Thus, by a comparison of the Akar-Bale and the A-Pučikwar
versions it can be shown that the identity of the chief actor is a
minor and not a major motive.

If we compare the Akar-Bale legend with the Aka-Bea version recorded by
Mr Man we see that they have in common (1) the explanation of the
origin of night as due to the breaking of a rule, (2) the tracing back
of the trouble to the anti-social passion of anger on the part of the
actor or actors, (3) the account of the origin of dancing and singing
as a means of neutralising the effects of darkness. All the other
elements of the story are different in the two versions. In the Aka-Bea
story it is the killing of a grub (gurug) that brings on the night,
which is itself called gurug. What the meaning of this may be I cannot
say. I did not hear this version of the story, and was not able to make
any enquiries concerning it. All that it is necessary to note is that
both the legends express the social value of night, and they both
express it in very much the same way, the difference being that the
Akar-Bale version makes use of the connection between night and day and
the cicada, while the Aka-Bea story makes a similar use of some
connection (not yet explained) between the night and a grub.

Thus the comparison of different versions confirms the interpretation
here given. The legend expresses the negative social value of night as
a period when social activity is diminished and the power of protection
of the society therefore lessened. It does so by telling how the night
first arose as the result of disobedience to a ritual prohibition,
i.e., of meddling with the forces of nature. It traces the original
cause yet further back to the anger of one of the ancestors, anger
being itself a source of social disturbance. It passes on to express
the social value of the dance, with its accompanying song, and exhibits
the relation, within the system of social values, of dancing and
darkness. Thus, although the manner of expression may differ, yet what
is expressed is the same in both versions, and we are therefore
justified in regarding this as the essential content of them.

An exactly parallel explanation can be given of the Andaman notions
relating to the moon. The social value of moonlight is due to the fact
that it enables the natives to fish and catch turtle and dugong by
night. A clear moonlight night affords the best opportunity for
harpooning dugong. During the second quarter the light of the moon
steadily increases, and the period of moonlight falls in the first part
of the night. After the change to the third quarter the light steadily
diminishes, and moreover there is a gradually increasing period of
complete darkness at the beginning of the night. The natives do not
care to get up in the middle of the night to go fishing or hunting
turtle. Therefore the second quarter is the time when they undertake
such expeditions, and after the change to the third quarter they
abandon them largely or entirely, and if they do go out they have to
depend on torches. Therefore we may say that during the second quarter
the moon gives valuable help to the natives, but during the third
quarter withdraws that help.

At the beginning of the third quarter the moon rises in the evening
with a ruddy hue. The natives explain this red and swollen appearance
by saying that the moon is angry. When a man does something that hurts
or damages another it is generally (in Andamanese life) because he is
angry. So to say that the moon is angry is equivalent to saying that he
is damaging or hurting someone, as he is indeed damaging the society by
withdrawing the light by which for the past week or so they have been
able to capture fish and turtle. The phenomena of the change of the
moon in so far as they affect the social life are represented as if
they were the actions of a human being. We may describe this briefly by
saying that the moon is personified, using that term in a special sense
to be defined more exactly later. Amongst the Andamanese, as amongst
ourselves, anger is associated with heat, and this explains why the red
glow of the moon when he rises during the first few nights of the third
quarter is regarded as the visible sign of his anger.

Even the moon, however, is not to be expected to be angry without a
cause. The natives say that the anger is due to some bright light
having been visible at the time the moon rises. The personification is
thus further elaborated. The moon gives the light by which fishing and
turtle hunting at night are possible. This light has a positive social
value, and its withdrawal is an evil. They therefore regard the moon as
jealous, so jealous that if anyone makes use of an artificial light, as
of a fire or torch or burning resin, the moon immediately is consumed
with anger and withdraws the light that has been of so much use and has
not been sufficiently appreciated. This belief is a means by which the
value of the moonlight is recognized. Thus the beliefs about the moon
can be interpreted in exactly the same way as the legend about night;
both express, in accordance with the same psychological laws, the
social values of natural phenomena.

I will next consider not a single legend but a number of different
stories, running through all of which we can find a single major
motive. I have recorded [192] three legends which relate, with some
differences of detail, how in the beginning the ancestors had no fire,
how fire was introduced by one of them, and how many of them, being
burnt or frightened, were turned into animals of different kinds. In
one version [193] the sea-eagle came into the camp of the ancestors and
threw fire amongst them; whereby many of them being frightened were
turned into animals. Another version is very similar, the chief actor,
however, being the prawn [194]. In an Akar-Bale version Dim-do̱ri, now a
fish, obtained the fire and burnt some of the ancestors with it so that
they became fishes [195].

This legend is a widespread one, being found both in the north and in
the south of the islands. The fact that the actor is different in the
three recorded versions proves that the identity of the hero of the
tale is a minor motive, i.e., one that may be varied without affecting
the essential meaning of the myth.

The story serves as an explanation of the markings on birds and fishes,
these being where the ancestor who became the species was burnt by the
fire. Thus the legend is of the kind that is often called etiological.
The common method of explaining such legends is to say that they are
crude attempts on the part of primitive man to explain the natural
phenomena with which they deal, in this case the bright colours of
birds and fishes. Such an interpretation cannot be regarded as
adequate. Why should the Andaman Islanders want to explain the markings
of animals? Why should they explain them in the form of a legend, and
why should the legend take this peculiar form?

The clue to the true interpretation of the three stories mentioned must
be sought in the social value of fire. It was shown in the last chapter
that fire is regarded as the symbol of social life and social activity,
the centre around which the social life revolves, the source from which
it draws its force. We may say, in a word, that it is the possession of
fire that makes social life (as the Andamanese know it) possible. It
was shown that it is on account of this relation of the society to fire
that the latter is believed to be a source of security, of protection
against the spirits. Now amongst all the creatures that inhabit the
world, man is the only one that possesses and makes use of fire. Here,
then, is the fundamental notion that is expressed in these legends. At
first, so the story runs, animals and human beings were one, were not
distinguished. Then came the discovery of fire. Some of the
(undifferentiated) ancestors fled from the fire, because they were
afraid of it, or because it burnt them. They became birds and beasts
and fishes, retaining their fear of the fire, and being cut off for
ever from the human society which, from that moment, constitutes itself
around the fire. It is the possession of the fire that makes human
beings what they are, that makes life as they live it possible. It is
equally (according to the legend) the lack of fire, or the lack of
ability to make use of fire, that makes the animals what they are, that
cuts them off from participation in human life.

This, briefly, is the way I would explain the legend mentioned above,
and ample confirmation will be forthcoming when we consider some of the
other legends. Attention may be called here to a very significant
phrase in a version of the fire legend recorded by Mr Portman [196] to
the effect that “it was on account of the fire (i.e. of the possession
of fire) that the ancestors became alive.”

The three stories considered above contain three motives. (1) They
express the social value of fire, by making the foundation of human
society (through the differentiation of men and animals) depend on the
discovery of fire. (2) They express a peculiar notion as to the
relation of the human species to other animals, which is found also in
other legends. (3) They give a legendary explanation of some of the
characteristics of animals, such as the bright colours of certain birds
and fishes.

It would seem that these same motives are present in many of the
legends relating to the origin of fire. In the common version of the
fire legend the fire is stolen from Biliku (Puluga) by the kingfisher.
This bird has a patch of bright red feathers at the neck and these are
explained as being where he was struck by the fire or the pearl-shell
(lightning) flung by Biliku. In one variant the kingfisher swallowed
the fire and had his head cut off by the lightning, whereupon the fire
came out of his neck where the red feathers now are. In most of the
versions it would seem to be implied that though the kingfisher
succeeded in obtaining fire for the use of the ancestors, he was
himself unable to profit by his own exertions, for he was turned into a
bird condemned to eat his fish raw for ever. In one story, however,
from the Aka-Kede tribe, it would seem that the kingfisher, by the
possession of fire, and through the loss of his wings and tail, became
a man. There is a lack of logic here which it is worth while to note.
Although the kingfisher became a man yet the legend is clearly based on
the explanation of the red feathers of the bird’s neck as due to the
action of the fire. The psychological significance of such
inconsistencies as this will have to be discussed later on.

Let us now consider another group of legends. We have seen that one
explanation (in the mythological sense) of how the birds arose is that
they were ancestors who fled from the fire. There are other stories
that give a different account and relate that the animals came into
existence through a great flood or storm that overwhelmed the
ancestors. Both of these legends are to be found in the same tribes.
Their incompatibility does not prevent them from being both equally
accepted. If it can be shown that the story of the flood is simply an
alternative method of expressing the same set of representations that
underlie the story of the origin of the animals through the discovery
of fire, the interpretation of the latter will be in some degree
confirmed.

One account of the flood or storm, variants of which were obtained from
both the north and south of the islands, tells how the ancestors only
with great difficulty succeeded in saving the fire. Although it is not
explicitly stated, we may conclude, I think, that it was because some
of the ancestors kept their fire alight that they remained human, while
those who lost their fire were turned into animals. If my personal
impressions are of any value, this is really the idea that does
underlie the legend in the native mind. Thus it would appear that this
version of the flood myth is simply a reversal of the fire legend
previously considered. They both express the same thing in different
ways. They both make the possession of fire the thing on which social
(i.e., human) life depends, the fundamental difference between man and
animals.

It may be objected to this interpretation that in some of the versions
of the flood myth there is no reference to the ancestors being turned
into animals, while in others there is no reference to the saving of
the fire. The reply to this is that if we are to understand the legends
we must not consider each separately, but must seek out the connections
between the different stories, connections that are not always obvious.
Thus, as there are, in each of the tribes, different versions of a
flood myth it might be supposed that the natives believe in several
different floods having taken place in the times of the ancestors. Mr
Man seems to have come to the conclusion that there were two distinct
floods. I am fully satisfied, from personal knowledge, that the natives
think of only one flood or catastrophe, and refer to it all the
different legends. Sometimes a man will relate how the flood came and
the fire was nearly lost, but will make no mention of the origin of
animals at this time. At another time the same man will relate how the
flood turned the ancestors into animals, but will make no mention of
the saving of the fire. To understand the meaning of the legends we
must connect these different stories together, for we know that they
are connected in the minds of the Andaman Islanders themselves. Every
native knows that it was at the time of the flood that the animals came
into existence and he may remember this fact when he hears the story of
how the fire was nearly lost. Similarly, when he hears the story of how
the animals came into existence he remembers the other story of how the
fire was nearly lost. Thus one man gave me a legend of the flood which
explained the origin of the animals, and at the very end he mentioned
as an afterthought “It was at this time that the fire was saved by Maia
Taolu.”

When we thus connect the different stories relating to the flood we see
that they express a definite system of representations or beliefs,
which are found in all the tribes, and that this system is sometimes
completely and sometimes partially expressed in the different versions.
On the interpretation here suggested the major motives of the flood
myth are (1) the social value of fire as expressed by making the
difference between man and the animals depend on its possession by the
former and not by the latter, and (2) the notion of the animals as
having once been one with the ancestors. These two motives are both
present in the legends of the origin of fire that were previously
considered. It can be shown that even the third motive of the fire
legend manages to creep into the flood story. In the Aka-Kede version
[197] the dove is mentioned as having saved the fire. The connection
between the dove and the fire (which appears in other legends) [198]
would seem to have its basis in the shining plumage of the bird, just
as the kingfisher is connected with the fire through the red feathers
of its neck.

The details of the legends may be briefly mentioned. One Aka-J̌eru
version [199] explains how one of the ancestors made a noise by
breaking firewood while the cicada was singing and so raised a great
storm, in which the fire was nearly lost, and in which many of the
ancestors were turned into animals. This version is a fairly complete
expression of the fundamental representations on which the whole group
of legends is based. There is an elaboration of one point in that an
account is given of how the cyclone was brought about. This is a
separate motive which will be discussed and explained later in
connection with the Biliku myth.

Another legend from the same tribe [200] relates to a storm that was
caused in the same way, and that resulted in the destruction of the
whole world. The fire, which was nearly extinguished, was saved by one
of the ancestors. No mention was made of the ancestors being turned
into animals. This version, however, as I have recorded it, is
incomplete. I was unfortunately unable to understand some of what the
narrator told me.

The Aka-Kede version [201] similarly does not distinctly state that the
ancestors who were destroyed by the flood were turned into animals, but
the fact that the three persons mentioned in the legend are all birds
suggests that it was at this time that the birds originated. The bird
called čarami-lebek, having lowered the surviving ancestors to the
ground with their fire, remained at the top of the Dipterocarpus tree
and has been there ever since. The Aka-Ko̱l version of the same story
[202] simply states that the ancestors were turned into animals in a
cyclone, but contains no mention of the rescue of the fire.

In a number of these legends it is stated that the ancestors saved
themselves by climbing up into a tall tree or into the trees. This is
to be explained by the fact that the birds all live up in the trees,
and a great many of them can never be seen save overhead. The top of
the forest is where the birds live, it is their world, raised above the
world of men and women. The flood drove the inhabitants up to the tops
of the trees. The birds remained there and only the human beings came
down again. As the original inhabitants were driven up into the trees
by water covering the land we may complete the myth by saying that
those who failed to reach the upper world were on that account
compelled to spend the rest of their existence in the water as fish and
turtle. This is, I think, what the legend really means. Thus the story
of the flood gives a picture of a threefold world, the waters below
with their inhabitants the fishes and turtle and other marine
creatures, the solid earth, and the upper region of the top of the
forest where the flowers bloom and the butterflies and other insects
and the birds pass their lives. This representation of the top of the
forest as a world in itself may seem strange to one who has never seen
a tropical forest, but to one who has spent months beneath it the
forest-top of the Andamans does seem a world in itself, near yet
inaccessible, a world where there is a gay and interesting life in the
sunshine above, of which the wanderer in the deep shade beneath can
only catch occasional glimpses as he gazes up through the tangle of
boughs and leaves. For the natives of the islands therefore the top of
the forest is an alien world into which they can only penetrate with
extreme difficulty, by climbing, and with the life of which they have
little to do. Similarly the waters of the sea are another world into
which they can only penetrate for a few moments at a time by diving
[203].

It may be said that, on this view, no allowance is made for the
existence of terrestrial animals. That is true, but it must be
remembered that there are very few such animals in the Andamans. The
civet-cat and the monitor lizard and some of the snakes are as much
arboreal in their habits as they are terrestrial. There remain only the
pig and the rat as true terrestrial animals, and it may be noted that
neither of these two animals ever figures in the legends as an
ancestor. There are independent legends that relate to the origin of
the pig, and the rat seems to be of so little importance that no
explanation of its origin would seem to be necessary. Moreover the
monitor lizard and the civet-cat, which are partly terrestrial, occupy
for this reason exceptional positions in the legends. Thus there is a
legend recorded from the Aka-Kede tribe which accounts for the
simultaneous origin of the civet-cat and the pigs through a game of the
ancestors [204]. The monitor lizard is in an altogether exceptional
position in that it is equally at home in the trees, on the ground and
in the water of a creek. It is in a way free of all the three divisions
of the world. This helps us to understand why in some of the tribes the
monitor lizard is regarded as the original ancestor not only of the
Andamanese but also of all the animals, including the birds of the
forest and the fishes of the sea. The civet-cat cannot live in the
water as the lizard can [205], but can climb trees and run on the
ground. In many of the legends the civet-cat is said to be the wife of
the monitor lizard. It will be remembered that in the Akar-Bale story
it is the civet-cat, the wife of the first ancestor (the monitor
lizard), who saved the fire from the flood by climbing up to the top of
a steep hill with it. Thus it may be seen that the position of the
monitor lizard and the civet-cat in the legends of the Andamanese is
partly determined by the position that these two animals occupy in
relation to the threefold division of the world revealed in the story
of the flood.

The repeated mention of the Dipterocarpus tree in these legends would
seem to indicate that it is a motive of importance. The tree is the
tallest tree of the Andaman forests, and is very common, but it is
probable that this does not afford an adequate explanation, and that
there are other ideas connected with it in the minds of the Andamanese
that would justify the place it occupies in the mythology. In one
Aka-J̌eru story the whole forest is said to have sprung from a
Dipterocarpus seed dropped by Biliku after she had destroyed the
original forest in her anger. It may be noted in passing that in the
languages of the North Andaman the word for this tree is the same as
the word for dugong.

Let us now briefly examine the story of the origin of animals as
recorded from the Akar-Bale tribe [206]. There are three variants of
this story. The one recorded from an A-Pučikwar informant [207] must
really be regarded, I believe, as an imperfect reproduction of the
Akar-Bale version. The version given by Mr Man [208] is also of
Akar-Bale origin, as is shown by the fact that the phrases in it are in
the Akar-Bale language. A comparison of these variants shows that the
main purpose of the story is to relate how a great storm or cyclone
visited the islands in the times of the ancestors and turned many of
them into animals. The storm was brought about by the action of one of
the ancestors who in anger did some of the things that are known to
anger Puluga and cause a storm.

In some of the other legends we find the same motive. Thus in an
Aka-J̌eru legend [209] the flood is said to have been caused by one of
the ancestors breaking firewood while the cicada was singing. In an
Aka-Kede version [210] this part of the story is further elaborated,
and a reason is given for this action on the part of the ancestor.
Ko̱po-tera-wat was angry with the rest of the ancestors because they
refused to give him any of the honey they had collected, and he
therefore deliberately performed the action that brought the storm. The
purpose of these elements of the legend is to explain how the great
flood came about, by tracing it to the anti-social action of some one
or more of the ancestors, just as the night is supposed to have been
produced by an ancestor who performed a forbidden action. In the
Aka-Kede version and also, as we shall see, in the Akar-Bale story, the
matter is traced still further back and the anti-social action of the
ancestor is explained as being caused by his anger which had been
aroused by a disagreement with the ancestors. The origin of the
catastrophe that separated the once united ancestors into animals and
human beings is thus traced to the fact that they could not live
together sociably and in harmony.

In the Akar-Bale story the part which explains how one of the ancestors
came to give way to anger is highly elaborated. It starts with the
quarrel of the tree-lizard with some of the ancestors. (It may be noted
in passing that the tree-lizard is quarrelsome in reality.) This leads
to the death of the lizard (or his transformation into an animal that
still bears the name), and so to the grief of his mother and her anger
against the ancestors who have killed her son. This elaboration of one
part of the story tends to obscure the meaning of the whole. This is
particularly the case in the version recorded by myself in which the
anger of the tree-lizard is the direct cause of the change of some of
the ancestors into animals. The narrator sets out to explain how a
flood or cyclone came and turned the ancestors into fishes and birds.
He elaborates the details of the first part of the story to such an
extent that he loses sight of the conclusion. The purpose of the story
as explaining the origin of animals remains in his mind, however, and
gives rise to the description of how some of the animals had their
origin as animals (i.e., were cut off from the human society) by being
thrown by the lizard into the forest or into the sea. The legend in
this form may therefore be regarded as giving an alternative
explanation of the separation of the animals from the human society,
the cause of the separation being a great quarrel in which they were
all involved. In other words, human society is only possible if
personal anger be subordinated to the need of good order; the animals
are cut off from human society because they could not live peaceably
together without quarrelling.

The examination of the variants of the flood-myth has taken us away
from the main argument. In the various stories there are two separable
elements. There is first the explanation of how a disastrous flood or
storm was caused by the non-observance of ritual prohibitions connected
with Biliku (Puluga). This element will have to be considered in
relation to the Biliku myth. There is secondly the account of how
through the flood or storm the birds and fishes became separated from
the human race, and the three regions of the world, as the Andaman
Islander knows it, became established. It is this second element that I
have sought to explain. To repeat the argument, I would hold that it is
really through the loss of the fire that the birds and fishes became
cut off from mankind, and that therefore this element of the legends of
the flood expresses exactly the same notion as the legend of the
catastrophe that followed the discovery of fire. The two groups of
legends result from the way the Andaman Islander feels about the fire
as being the one thing on which the society most completely depends for
its welfare.

The preceding analysis has shown that the legends relating to the
origin of animals, whether through the action of fire, or by the flood,
serve to express the social value of fire. If this interpretation be
correct we have a close parallel to the explanation of the story of the
origin of night. In both cases, it has been argued, what the legend
really expresses is the way in which a particular phenomenon (fire, in
one case, the alternation of day and night in the other) affects the
life of the society and the sentiments on which that life depends. The
legends of the catastrophe, however, obviously contain another element
of importance, revealing as they do a certain way of thinking about the
animals. This element has not yet been explained. The representation of
the birds, etc., as ancestors is not confined to one particular legend
or group of legends, but runs through them all. Its explanation is
therefore better postponed until we come to deal with the general
features of the mythology, and will then have to be undertaken.

Let us now turn to the legends that concern Biliku (Puluga) and Tarai
(Deria), which are of capital importance in the Andaman mythology. The
clue to the understanding of them lies in the Andamanese notions about
the weather and the seasons. In the Andaman Islands the year may be
divided into four seasons. There is the cool season lasting from the
beginning of December to the middle of February; immediately following
this is the hot season from February to the middle of May; then comes
the rainy season, from May to the end of September; October and
November constitute a short season to themselves. In the cool season
the weather is uniformly cool; there is very little rain, and storms
are almost unknown; the wind blows uniformly from the N.E. In the hot
season there is little or no rain; the wind is generally N.E., but may
be variable; summer lightning is frequent, but there are no violent
storms except at the very end of the season. During the rainy season,
after a short period of uncertain stormy weather with which it begins,
the wind blows uniformly from the S.W.; it rains heavily, sometimes
every day for weeks together, but violent storms (cyclones) are very
rare. Between the rainy season proper and the cool season there is a
period of six or eight weeks in which the weather is unsettled; the
wind is variable; fine weather alternates with storms that are
sometimes of terrific violence; waterspouts are frequent; it is at this
season that violent cyclonic storms are likely to occur. This season is
called by the Andamanese Kimil (Gumul of Aka-Bea). We have seen in the
last chapter that the word kimil denotes a condition of social danger,
or of contact with the power possessed by all things that can affect
the life and safety of the society. It is obviously in this sense, and
not as meaning “hot,” that it is applied to the season in question, for
the months of October and November are fairly cool, certainly very much
cooler than February and March. We shall find that this is an important
point in connection with the Biliku myth.

The life of the Andaman Islander is profoundly affected by the
alternation of the seasons. There are, first of all, the violent
cyclonic storms that occasionally occur. Such a storm may uproot the
jungle for miles, making it impassable for years to come, and thus
destroying some of the native hunting grounds. The wind is sometimes so
violent as to tear every leaf from the trees in its path. While the
storm lasts there is danger to the lives of the natives. An old man
recounted to me how on the occasion of a violent cyclone he and the
others of his village took refuge in the sea and on the open shore from
the danger of falling trees, and remained there till the violence of
the storm had abated. The usual name for a cyclone in Aka-J̌eru is
to̱ko-po̱r, i.e. “falling wood” or “falling trees.” Even if all the
natives escape the danger of death or injury, there is still the
extreme fear and discomfort of the experience. If a storm lasts for any
length of time the natives, who are unable or afraid to go out hunting,
have to do without food until it is over. Incidentally the storm may
destroy their huts, canoes, and other property and thus cause loss that
has to be made up by toil.

The second important effect of the seasons on the life of the
Andamanese is through the food supply. During the cool season, and the
succeeding hot season, a number of vegetable foods, including the very
important roots and some of the most prized fruits, are available. On
the other hand, during these seasons the land animals are in poor
condition. In the hot season, at any rate, lizards, snakes and the
civet-cat are not eaten. Pigs are breeding and are in such poor
condition that often a pig that has been killed is left in the jungle
as being not good enough to eat. The hot season is pre-eminently the
season of honey, which is so abundant that the natives are able to
obtain much more than they can consume. In the rainy season there are
few vegetable foods and very little honey, but on the other hand the
jungle animals are in good condition and flesh food is abundant; fish
are more plentiful in this season than during the dry weather. In the
Kimil season (October and November) the natives add to their food
supply two varieties of grub (the larvæ of the cicada and of a beetle)
which are regarded as great delicacies. Roughly we can say that the
rainy season is the season of flesh food, the Kimil season is the
season of grubs, the cool season is the season of fruits and roots, and
the hot season is the season of honey.

By reference to the prevailing wind the year may be divided into two
parts, the N.E. monsoon from November to May, and the S.W. monsoon from
May to November.

I propose to show that the Andaman Islanders express the social value
of the phenomena of the weather and the seasons, i.e., the way these
phenomena affect the social life and the social sentiments, by means of
legends and beliefs relating to the two mythical beings whom they call
Biliku and Tarai. Using the word personification in a sense to be
defined later in the chapter, we may say that the Andamanese personify
the weather and the seasons in the persons of Biliku and Tarai. Biliku
is associated with the N.E. monsoon; she lives in the N.E.; the wind
from that quarter is called “the Biliku wind”; to Biliku, therefore,
belong the cool and the hot seasons, these being the seasons of the
N.E. monsoon. Tarai is associated with the S.W. monsoon; he lives in
the S.W.; the wind from that quarter is called “the Tarai wind,” or, in
Aka-Bea, simply Deria; to Tarai therefore belongs the rainy season. It
is possible to show that the Andaman Islanders associate with these two
beings all the phenomena of the weather and the seasons, and are able
to represent the changes of the latter as though they were the actions
of human or anthropomorphic beings.

In the mass of beliefs and stories relating to Biliku and Tarai there
are some elements on which there is absolute agreement in all the
tribes of the Great Andaman Division. I propose to treat these as being
the most important elements. There is absolute unanimity, for instance,
as to the connection of Biliku and Tarai with the N.E. and the S.W.
respectively, and with the winds that blow from these two points of the
compass. Further, this belief does not conflict in any way with any
other belief of the Andamanese. There is similar unanimity in the
beliefs that Biliku is angry at the digging up of yams, and at the
melting of bees’-wax. There are other matters on which the agreement is
fairly general but not absolute. For instance, there is a common belief
that it was Biliku who first discovered fire, but there are also
legends as to the origin of fire in which Biliku does not figure. I
propose to treat such elements as these as being of secondary
importance. Finally there are other elements with regard to which the
beliefs of different tribes are not in agreement. For instance, in the
South Andaman Puluga is regarded as male, while in the North Andaman
Biliku is female. I propose to regard such elements as being of only
minor importance, i.e., as not being closely connected with the central
notion or notions expressed in the myth.

Applying the strict method outlined above, we may begin by noting that
there is complete unanimity in regard to the connection of Biliku and
Tarai with the N.E. and the S.W. respectively, and therefore with the
monsoons. No interpretation of the myth can be adequate unless it sets
out from this fact. The connection is so firmly fixed that it appears
in the names of the winds themselves [211]. Even in this matter of the
winds, however, there is a slight difference in the detail of the
beliefs in different tribes. In the North Andaman it would seem that
only the two principal winds are recognized; the S.W. wind (more
accurately W.S.W.) is called “the Tarai wind” (not, be it noted, “the
wind of Tarai”); the N.E. (or more accurately N.N.E.) wind is called
“the Biliku wind.” These two winds are by far the most important, as
the former blows steadily throughout the rainy season and the latter
blows with almost equal steadiness throughout a good part of the cool
and hot seasons. In the Aka-Bea and Akar-Bale tribes the general belief
seems to be precisely the same as in the North Andaman. Only the two
principal winds are considered to be of importance and one is
associated with Deria and the other with Puluga. In these two tribes,
as in the North Andaman, practically no notice is taken of the
existence of winds from other quarters. In the A-Pučikwar tribe there
is a notable difference, of great importance to the true interpretation
of the legend. There is a dual division of the winds; the S.W. wind is
called Teria; the other winds (of which a number are recognized) are
all called Bilik. Thus Bilik is a generic name for a number of winds,
namely for all the northerly or easterly winds, including not only the
N.E., but also the N.W. and S.E. winds. The S.W. wind is called by a
simple name, Teria, or as it would be better rendered in English “the
Teria.” The other winds are called by compound names such as Me̱tepur
Bilik, Ko̱ičo Bilik, etc., which we can only translate as “the N.E.
Bilik,” “the East Bilik,” etc.

Two things of importance are shown by the consideration of these facts.
The first is that there is a sense in which it may be said that the
Andaman Islanders personify the winds in the persons of Biliku and
Tarai; they apply to the natural phenomenon a name which is also the
name of a mythological person, and they apply it directly and not in a
possessive form, i.e., they say “the Bilik” or “the Biliku wind” and
not “Biliku’s wind.” The second is that only the S.W. wind is
associated with Tarai and all the other winds are associated with
Biliku.

The last point is one of considerable importance in the interpretation
of the myth. If we divide the year by reference to the prevailing
winds, then the rainy season, with the exception of its beginning and
its end, belongs to the S.W. wind; the hot season (save its end) and
the cool season may be regarded as belonging to the N.E. wind, though
the wind may be variable in the hot season; there remain two portions
of the year, at the change of the monsoon, when the wind is variable,
which cannot be classified as belonging strictly to the S.W. or to the
N.E. wind. The fact that all these variable winds are denoted in the
A-Pučikwar tribe by the name Bilik shows that in this tribe they are
all classified with the N.E. wind. In this way the year is divided into
two slightly unequal parts, one belonging to Teria or Tarai including
the whole of the rainy season except the end and the very beginning,
the other belonging to Bilik (Biliku) including the Kimil season, the
cool season, the hot season, and even the first few days of the rainy
season. This strict division only appears in the A-Pučikwar tribe, but
it will be shown that an approximation to the same notion is found in
the other tribes.

There is general agreement in all the tribes in the belief that storms
are due to Biliku or Tarai. Both of them send rain and thunder and
lightning, but whenever mention is made in the legends of a violent
storm it is always Biliku who is mentioned as causing it, and never by
any chance Tarai. Thus, in regard to this matter of storms, it is
evident that Biliku is more important than Tarai, and this is only one
example of the preponderance of Biliku over her consort. This
preponderance will need to be explained as one of the essentials of the
myth [212].

We have already seen how the Andaman Islander represents any natural
phenomenon having negative social value as though it were the result of
the action of a person in anger, this being the one anti-social passion
with which he is most familiar in his own life. Thus the withdrawing of
the light of the moon after the full is explained as being due to the
anger of the moon. The negative social value of a violent storm is
obvious. In accordance with the general principles of his mythology the
Andaman Islander therefore explains the storm as being due to the anger
of a personal mythical being. But storms are intimately connected with
the winds, so that it must be Biliku and Tarai (in whom the winds are
personified) who are responsible for the storms. Further, in the
Andamans, violent storms are very rare except at two special periods of
the year, at the change of the monsoon. This gives a further ground of
association with Biliku and Tarai between whom the seasons are divided.
We have seen that in classifying the winds the natives (of one tribe at
any rate) associate with Tarai only the steady S.W. wind which brings
not cyclones and violent storms but steady rain, while all the other
winds are associated with Biliku. If this be so it is clear that a
cyclone, with its wind veering from one quarter to another, must be the
work of Biliku. Further, if the Biliku season be regarded as including
all the periods of variable northerly and easterly winds as well as the
period of the steady N.E., then we can say that it is only in the
Biliku period that violent storms are likely to occur. It is evident
therefore that an examination of the natural phenomena themselves gives
us an adequate reason for the preponderance of Biliku over Tarai in the
legends. This will be made even more evident as we proceed.

Another law of the Andaman mythology is that a person, such as the
moon, is never angry without cause. There are a number of actions that
are believed by the Andamanese to cause the anger of Biliku; of these
there are three of extreme importance, all the others being certainly
of much less importance. It is necessary, therefore, to examine these
three carefully and find their meaning.

There is absolute agreement in all the tribes with regard to the belief
that Biliku is angry and sends bad weather when bees’-wax is melted or
burnt. The season of honey is the hot season from February to May.
During the rainy season scarcely any honey is to be found and that only
of the inferior (black) variety. It is clear therefore that honey
belongs particularly to the Biliku portion of the year. During the hot
season honey is abundant and large quantities are collected. As the
natives make use of the wax, and as this is useless till it has been
melted, this is the special season of the melting of bees’-wax. At the
beginning of the season the Biliku wind blows calmly from the N.N.E. As
the season draws to a close the wind becomes variable, uncertain, and
in some years violent storms occur ushering in the rains of the S.W.
monsoon. Year after year the wax-melting season comes to a close in
stormy weather. Now stormy weather and the anger of Biliku are, for the
Andaman Islander, one and the same thing, so that to say that the anger
of Biliku follows the melting of bees’-wax is in one sense simply a
statement of actual observable fact.

Another belief about which there is absolute unanimity in all parts of
the Islands is that Biliku is angry when certain plants are cut down or
dug up. These plants include some of the most valuable vegetable foods
of the Andamanese, such as the yams and the pith of the Caryota palm.
Amongst the roots and fruits associated with Biliku there are one or
two that were not botanically identified. All of them, however, about
which I was able to obtain any information whatever, are available as
food during the cool and hot seasons, and either not at all or in very
small quantities during the rainy season. On the other hand, of the
vegetable foods that are available during the rainy season, not one is
ever mentioned as being in any way connected with Biliku. Further,
amongst all the foods of the cool and hot seasons only those are
intimately connected with Biliku which begin to be available during the
Kimil season. A few examples may be mentioned. The yams and other
edible roots are not found at all in the rainy season, but the tubers
begin to form in the Kimil season (October and November) and small
quantities of these roots are available for food at that time. By the
time the cool season has set in the roots become abundant, and they
continue to be found until well on into the hot season. All these roots
are regarded as being specially connected with Biliku and are spoken of
as her foods. The same thing applies to the Caryota sobolifera of which
the pith is eaten either raw or cooked. The pith begins to form in the
Kimil season, and this highly prized food is available right through
the cool season. The fruit of the Cycas, which is another of those
belonging to Biliku, also begins to ripen at the beginning of the cool
weather. As regards the Entada scandens, Kurz, in his Burmese Flora,
mentions it as seeding in the “cold season.” I neglected to take note
of the relation of this plant to the seasons, but the statement of Kurz
may be relied on. Thus it is seen that the vegetable foods that are
associated with Biliku are those that begin to be available for food
during the Kimil season and are abundant during the cool season. Now
the Kimil season, which is really the opening of the N.E. or Biliku
monsoon, is the season at which cyclonic storms are likely to occur.
Here again therefore, as in the case of bees’-wax, there is a definite
ground of association in familiar natural phenomena. Year after year,
as these foods begin to ripen and to be eaten, the islands are visited
with stormy weather, sometimes of exceptional violence. When the
Andaman Islander says that the stormy weather which is the sign of the
anger of Biliku follows the digging up of yams and the cutting down of
the Caryota palm or the gathering of the seeds of the Cycas or Entada,
he is stating what is an actual fact.

The case of these vegetable foods is in one way different from that of
bees’-wax. The melting of the wax goes on for some weeks before the
anger of Biliku is finally aroused, when storms come to punish the
offenders, and the change of season cuts short the supply of honey. In
the case of the roots, etc., it would seem that it is only the first
step that counts. The danger lies in the beginning of the season. Once
the anger of Biliku has burst forth the bad weather ceases, the danger
is past, and weeks of fine weather ensue, during which the natives may
eat freely of the foods in question without fear of consequences. In
this connection considerable importance may be attached to a statement
made to me on more than one occasion, to the effect that the most
efficient way of stopping a storm is to go into the forest and destroy
the plants that belong to Biliku, i.e., do the very things that make
her angry. We may apply this to the events of the Kimil season. The
natives begin to dig up yams and collect other vegetable foods, and
thereupon Biliku becomes angry and stormy weather follows. All that the
natives have to do is to show sufficient persistence in continuing to
eat yams, etc., and the anger of Biliku is bound to subside and the
stormy weather to cease.

There is a third belief that is generally accepted in all parts of the
Great Andaman, that Biliku is angry if a cicada be killed, or if a
noise be made while the cicada is singing in the morning or the
evening. The interpretation of this belief is made difficult by the
fact that there is also an association between the cicada and the day
and night. Thus Mr Man states that the prohibition against making a
noise at dawn (while the cicada is singing) is associated not with
Puluga but with the sun [213].

The grub of the cicada is eaten during the Kimil season, and at no
other time of the year. Here the association is simple enough. The
killing of the cicada (grub) takes place only during a brief season,
and this is the season when cyclones occur. However, the grub of a
beetle is eaten at the same season and yet I never heard of any
connection between Biliku and this other grub. Certainly if there is a
belief in such a connection it is very much less important than the
belief relating to the cicada. Further, there is the belief that if the
imago of the cicada be killed or if a noise be made while the cicada is
singing, Biliku will be angry and will send bad weather, which is
obviously not simply the result of the custom of eating the grub of the
cicada during the Kimil season.

The relation of the cicada to Biliku is almost certainly due to the
connection of the insect with the seasons. Unfortunately, not then
recognizing the importance of the matter, I did not, while in the
Andamans, take particular note of the relation of the life-cycle of the
cicada to the revolution of the seasons, and I am reluctant to trust to
vague memories of matters to which I did not pay special attention. Mr
Man states, apparently on the authority of a native, that during the
cold and dry seasons the cicada is seldom seen (and is therefore
presumably also seldom heard). What I believe to be the life-cycle of
the insect is as follows. During the rainy season only the adult
insects are to be found. They lay their eggs at some period during the
rainy season, possibly towards the end. In October and November the
eggs have developed into pupæ, and it is these that the natives eat;
but apparently the adult insects, or some of them, still survive at
this time and are to be seen and heard. By about December the last of
the adult insects die out and the grubs have not yet attained the adult
form, so that there is a period during which no adult insects are
either seen or heard. It is probable that the new generation makes its
first appearance in adult form as soon as the first rains of the rainy
season begin.

The essential point, on which we can base an interpretation of the
myth, is that the cicada is not seen or heard during the fine weather
(December to March). It probably, as stated above, makes its
reappearance just at the period of the stormy weather that ushers in
the rainy season. Similarly, it does not disappear until after the end
of the stormy period of the Kimil season. (I have certainly heard and
seen the insect in October, and to the best of my recollection in
November also.) Thus the cicada is definitely associated with the part
of the year including the rainy season and the two stormy periods at
its beginning and end. I believe that this is the fundamental fact that
explains the Andamanese beliefs about the connection of the insect with
the weather.

I was told of a ceremony that was held at the end of the Kimil season
in the Akar-Bale tribe (and possibly in other tribes also) the purpose
of which was said to be to ensure fine weather for some months and
which is called “Killing the cicada.” The ceremony consists of doing
the very thing that is believed to produce storms, viz., making a noise
while the cicada is singing in the evening. As soon as the cicadæ begin
to sing all the persons in camp make as much noise as they can by
banging bamboos on the ground, striking the sounding-board, or
hammering on the sides of canoes, thus making just the kinds of noise
that are said to be most disliked by the cicada. According to the
statement of my informant this ceremony results in “killing” all the
cicadæ so that they are not heard again for many weeks, and while this
silence lasts fine weather is assured. The meaning of this little
ceremony is plain when we recall the fact that though the digging up of
yams and the cutting down of the Caryota palm anger Biliku and result
in storms yet sufficient persistence in these actions, and therefore in
any others that are displeasing to Biliku, results in dispelling the
bad weather. Thus it is seen that although the matter is a little more
complicated, yet the belief in the connection of the cicada with Biliku
and with bad weather can be explained on exactly the same lines as the
beliefs about bees’-wax and vegetable foods. The fact that the same
explanation can be given of the three most important prohibitions
connected with Biliku gives a high degree of probability to the
interpretation here offered. These three beliefs are the only ones of
real importance. I am unable to explain the connection of Biliku with
the species of fish, the bird and the two kinds of wood mentioned on
page 156. In the North Andaman there is a definite association between
Biliku and spiders, the generic name for “spider” being biliku. I
believe that this could be explained on the same basis as the
connection with the cicada, i.e., through the connection of spiders
with the changes of the seasons, but as I unfortunately neglected to
take note of the habits of the spiders of the Andamans I cannot speak
with any certainty and therefore prefer not to enter into a discussion
of the subject [214].

The explanation that I have to offer of these beliefs relating to
Biliku and to the things that offend her is that they are simply the
statement in a special form of observable facts of nature. The rainy
season comes to an end, the wind becomes variable, yams and other
vegetable products begin to ripen and are used for food, and stormy
weather comes, some years bringing cyclones of exceptional violence.
Then follows a period of steady N.E. winds with fine weather and
abundance of vegetable foods, during which the noise of the cicada is
not to be heard. Then comes the honey season, when everyone is busy
collecting honey and melting bees’-wax. The wind becomes very variable,
storms come, the fine weather comes to an end and the rainy season
begins again. These facts affect the feelings of the Andaman Islander
and he expresses his impressions by regarding all these happenings as
if they were the actions of an anthropomorphic being. The vegetable
products, the cicada, and the honey all belong to Biliku. When the yams
are dug up she is angry, or in other words, storms occur; a storm is
the anger of Biliku. The cessation of the song of the cicada removes
one of the possible causes of the anger of Biliku, and therefore marks
the period of fine weather. That anger appears once more when the
natives busy themselves with melting bees’-wax.

It may be noted that these beliefs about Biliku give an expression of
the social value of honey and bees’-wax and of vegetable foods such as
yams. The Andaman Islands provide few fruits containing natural sugar.
Yet the natives are inordinately fond of sweet things; they greatly
enjoy the sugar that they now obtain from the Settlement of Port Blair.
Honey, which was almost their only sweet food in former times, was
therefore very greatly valued. Apart from the yams and other foods
associated with Biliku there are very few productions of the Andamans
containing starch in a palatable form. To the native who has been
living during the rainy season almost entirely on meat and fish, the
starchy foods of the stormy season (yams, Caryota, etc.) are of great
value, and they are very highly prized. Thus the foods associated with
Biliku all have a high value.

We all know how the value of an object is increased if, in order to
obtain it, we have to make some considerable effort or sacrifice, or
put ourselves in danger of some evil. Reversing this mental process,
the Andaman Islander expresses his sense of the value of honey and yams
by the statement that to obtain them he must be prepared to risk the
anger of Biliku with its results. It was shown in the last chapter that
the value of food in general is expressed in the belief that all food
is more or less dangerous to eat, and that ritual precautions must be
observed if the danger is to be avoided. Here in the Biliku myth, we
have a further example of the same sort of mental process, in relation
not to all foods in general but to a few foods of special value. Yet
another example may be given. Roast pork is highly relished by the
natives, and they believe that the roasting of pork offends certain
spirits of the sky and is therefore dangerous [215].

Returning now to the subject of Biliku as the sender of cyclones, it is
necessary for the argument, even at the risk of repetition, to show (1)
that this is by far the most important attribute of Biliku, and (2)
that it follows immediately from her connection with the N.E. monsoon.

Taking the second point first, we may note, in the first place, that
while Tarai is associated with the steady S.W. wind which blows with
very little variation for months at a time, Biliku is associated with
the variable winds of the hot season. Now a characteristic of a
cyclonic storm is the way in which the wind veers from one quarter to
another. Further, as most of the cyclones that cross the Andamans
travel from the south-east in a north-westerly direction, and the
movement of the cyclone is in a counter-clockwise direction, the first
wind of a cyclonic storm when it strikes the islands comes from the
north-east. This may be seen from the accompanying diagram. It is only
at the very end of the storm, when the storm centre has passed, that
the wind blows from the south-west. Thus it is clear that the
association of cyclones with Biliku and not with Tarai is determined by
the nature of the phenomena which the Biliku-Tarai myth sets out to
explain.

That the most important attribute of Biliku is her connection with the
cyclones is evident when we consider the legends in which she is
mentioned. In most of the legends in which her name occurs [216] she is
spoken of as being angry with the ancestors, and we know that a cyclone
and the anger of Biliku are, for the Andaman Islander, one and the same
thing. In some of the stories mention is made of a great storm that
Biliku sent which nearly destroyed the world. All through the legends
we find her pictured as a being whose anger is to be feared, who has
the power to destroy human life and human property. Tarai is never
mentioned in this way, for the rains of the south-west monsoon
themselves have no such power.

We are now in a position to compare the characters of Biliku and Tarai
and explain their relative positions in the myth. The reason for the
preponderance of Biliku lies in the fact that it is she who sends
cyclones, while Tarai sends nothing more than heavy showers of rain.
Tarai is never responsible for the destruction of life and property,
whereas Biliku is. Thus the preponderance of Biliku follows from the
essentials of the myth. Secondly, Tarai is constant, ever the same,
whereas Biliku is changeable. The rainy season of one year is exactly
like that of another, and during the time it lasts the weather is
consistent throughout. On the contrary, one year the Biliku season
brings a terrific storm, and another year it is much less violent,
while, from day to day during certain parts of the Biliku season the
weather is unsettled, so that you cannot tell what the morrow will
bring with it. It is obvious that this uncertainty about the actions of
Biliku, the fact that she cannot altogether be reckoned with, would
tend to make her of greater importance in the eyes of the Andamanese
than her consort Tarai.

Let us now consider the question of the sex of Biliku. On this matter
there is a lack of agreement. In the North Andaman Tarai is declared to
be male and Biliku female. It can readily be shown that this results
from the position of Biliku and Tarai as regulating the seasons. Tarai
rules over the rainy season, in which the chief food is the flesh of
animals of the land and of the sea; it is the business of men to
provide flesh-food. On the contrary Biliku rules over the seasons in
which the chief foods are vegetable products of different kinds; it is
the business of women to provide such foods. It is only men who go out
hunting for pigs or turtle or who harpoon or shoot fish, and it is
always the men who attend to the first part of the cooking of pig,
turtle and dugong; it is the women who dig up the yams and collect the
fruits and seeds, and it is the women also who cook them. There is a
very real sense, then, in which flesh foods may be called the foods of
men, and vegetable foods may be called the foods of women, and, since
flesh foods are the foods of Tarai and vegetable foods are the foods of
Biliku, there is a sound reason for calling Tarai male and Biliku
female.

This way of thinking of Biliku as female is in harmony with her
character as outlined above. Women (in the Andamans) are notoriously
uncertain, changeable creatures. You can always reckon fairly well what
a man will do, but not so with a woman. Moreover, when the Andaman
Islander wishes to picture to himself a pair of closely associated
beings, it is natural that he should compare them to the most closely
associated couple with which he is familiar,—husband and wife. This
tendency leads him to make the sun and moon man and wife in many of his
legends, and it may well be expected to have its influence on the
Biliku myth also.

In the South Andaman however, both Puluga and Daria are said to be
male. It can be shown that this view is also appropriate in its way.
The Akar-Bale say that Puluga and Daria were once friends, but have
quarrelled and now live at opposite ends of the earth and are
perpetually renewing their quarrel. Daria has things to himself for a
few months (the S.W. monsoon) and sends his wind; then Puluga makes an
attack on him; some weeks of unsettled weather ensue while they are
fighting, until Daria is beaten and Puluga takes over the control of
the weather and sends the N.E. wind. By and by, however, Daria shows
himself again and there is another quarrel, with its unsettled and
stormy weather, which ends in the defeat of Puluga and the
reinstatement for a period of Daria. Even the bald language in which it
is stated does not quite hide the poetical grandeur of this conception
of the world as the arena of two battling giants in a never-ending
quarrel. Those who have lived through a tropical cyclone with its wind
changing from one quarter to another, its consummate violence, its
sudden onslaught, its pause (that is felt to be merely a pause) as the
centre of the disturbance reaches and passes you, and then its sudden
renewal of the mad combat with the wind coming now from the opposite
quarter, cannot but recognize in the Akar-Bale myth a successful
attempt to describe such a storm in figurative language.

Such a combat could only be pictured by the Andamanese as taking place
between two men, and the myth in this form therefore necessarily
involves the belief that both Puluga and Daria are male. It is evident,
therefore, that this view has some justification, that it does enable
the Andaman Islander to express the feelings and impressions evoked in
him by the phenomena of the weather. I venture to think, however, that
the southern myth is not quite so satisfactory as the northern one,
does not translate quite so well all the different features of the
natural phenomena with which it deals [217].

A most important element of the myth is the connection of Biliku
(Puluga) with fire. In all the tribes there are legends that represent
Biliku as the first possessor of fire, which was, according to some
versions, given by her to the ancestors, and according to others stolen
from her by one of them. There can be no doubt that these legends owe
their origin to the connection between Biliku the storm-sender and
lightning.

There are several different beliefs about the lightning. According to
one of these the lightning (Ele) and the thunder (Korude) are persons,
who produce the phenomena of the same name. Another belief is that
thunder and lightning are produced by Biliku and Tarai. On the whole,
it would seem that the latter belief is the one which is most
frequently present to the minds of the natives. A man seeing lightning
in the sky will say, according to the season, the prevailing wind,
etc., Biliku čatobom, or Tarai čatobom; “Biliku (or Tarai) is at work.”
There are different accounts, however, of the way in which Biliku makes
the lightning. One belief is that it is a fire-brand flung by her
through the sky; a second is that it is a mother-of-pearl shell (be)
similarly flung; yet a third statement is that she produces the
lightning by striking a pearl shell (be) on a red stone.

There is no doubt that the Andamanese regard lightning as fire; the
charring of trees struck by it is sufficient to convince them of this.
Thus lightning and the sun are the only two natural fires that they
know. (With the relation of Biliku to the sun I shall deal later.) As
the wielder of lightning Biliku thus becomes the possessor of fire. The
simplest of the different beliefs, the one following immediately from
the natural phenomena, would be, therefore, that which makes the
lightning a fire-brand. This is, on the whole, the one that is most
usually expressed, at any rate in the South Andaman.

The explanation of lightning as a shell depends not only upon the
pearly lustre of this kind of shell, but also on other features of it.
The shell in question (be) is used by women alone, and its use is
confined to slicing yams and other vegetables in preparing them for
food. Its association with Biliku therefore follows from the view of
Biliku as female and as being especially associated with yams and other
vegetable foods. Granting this fundamental connection, then the
brightness of the shell, its keen edge and the way in which it can be
made to skim through the air, will explain the statement that lightning
is just such a shell thrown by Biliku. In the South Andaman, where
Puluga is regarded as male, this belief about the pearl shell would be
out of harmony with the rest of the myth, and, as we should expect, it
is not found. However, the Aka-Bea word for lightning (be-iŋa, the -iŋa
or -ŋa being a suffix) suggests that they may have had a similar belief
in the past [218].

In the North Andaman the two views of lightning as a fire-brand and as
a shell are both held, because they both, in different ways, fit in
well with the rest of the myth. There is yet a third view in which
these two contradictory beliefs are, as it were, reconciled. This is
that Biliku produces lightning by striking a pearl shell against a red
stone.

In the North Andaman the action of throwing a shell or a fire-brand is
regarded as typical of Biliku; this is the way in which she is pictured
by the native, and in which she would doubtless be portrayed if the
Andamanese had a pictorial art. In the dance described in an earlier
chapter, in which the dancer gave representations of various mythical
beings, Biliku was represented by the dancer holding a shell in his
hand and dancing round threatening to throw the shell at the
spectators.

The representation of Biliku or Puluga as throwing her lightning in the
form of a fire-brand or a shell appears in several of the legends of
the origin of fire, and in particular in the legend of which different
versions are found in all parts of the islands that tells how the
kingfisher stole fire from Biliku and how the latter flung a fire-brand
or a shell at the thief.

The most usual form of the fire legend, and the only one that I ever
heard, is that in which the fire is stolen. Mr Man has recorded a
version in which Puluga is represented as giving the fire to the
ancestors. Considerable importance attaches to this motive of the story
as it reveals to us the way in which the Andamanese usually think of
Biliku and of their own relation to her. She is not, so far as these
stories go, a benefactress who by the invention of fire has earned the
gratitude of men, but rather a person with whom the human society, both
in the time of the ancestors and at the present day, is in a condition
of opposition. Though Biliku had fire, yet she kept it for herself and
it was only obtained from her by stealth. She was angry when her fire
was stolen and tried to punish the offender.

This opposition between Biliku and the ancestors is shown in other
legends. In some of the stories she is represented not as living with
the ancestors, but as living on one side of a narrow strait while the
ancestors lived on the other, as in the Akar-Bale and A-Pučikwar
legends. She is thus separated from the ancestors in the minds of the
natives. In the Aka-Kede legend the ancestors eat the foods that Bilika
regards as specially belonging to her, and she kills them. As a result
the ancestors join together and kill Bilika. In the Akar-Bale version
something of the same sort appears; Puluga is always getting angry with
the ancestors because they eat vegetable foods, and in his anger he
destroys their huts and other property (as a cyclone does, and as an
Andaman Islander is sometimes known to do in a fit of temper); at last
the ancestors send him away out of the world. In the A-Pučikwar legend
Bilik goes away from the world in anger because the ancestors steal his
fire. In the Aka-J̌eru version Biliku eats up all the food of the
ancestors, and so they go away and leave her; she then destroys them
with her shells (lightning) and finally perishes in an attempt to cross
the sea on a stone. All these legends seem to express much the same
thing in different ways, namely the existence of a condition of
hostility between Biliku and human beings, based on the fact that the
latter venture to make use of the things (yams, etc.) that Biliku
regards as peculiarly her property. There can be no doubt that this is
the usual way in which the Andamanese conceive the relation between
Biliku and the ancestors, and therefore, since the ancestors represent
the society in its beginnings, between Biliku and themselves. This
relation is quite in agreement with what we have seen to be the
essential basis of the myth. The natives obtain from the N.E. monsoon
things highly valued, such as yams and honey, but they are given as it
were grudgingly after a period of storms, and finally taken away in
another period of storms.

This view of Biliku as hostile to mankind is not, however, absolutely
universal if we are to accept Mr Man’s account of the myths of the
South Andaman. Mr Man describes Puluga as the creator of the world and
the beneficent ruler of mankind. Although I could not find a native who
held exactly the same views about Puluga as those that Mr Man
represents as being the views commonly held in the tribes he studied
(Aka-Bea and A-Pučikwar), yet there is no doubt that at times, and more
particularly in the southern tribes, the natives do regard Puluga as
the benefactor and even the creator of the human race [219].

The representation of Biliku as hostile to mankind depends upon her
position as the angry storm-sender, and this, as the legends show, does
seem to be the more usual way of regarding her. But there is another
and contrary aspect of Biliku. The revolution of the seasons brings to
the Andamanese new supplies of relished foods,—the grubs of the Kimil
season, the yams and honey of the cool and hot seasons. One of the
Andamanese names for the season of the N.E. monsoon means “the season
of abundance.” Therefore Biliku, as the personification of this season,
is herself the giver of good things. This aspect finds a partial
expression in the legends. Biliku is regarded as having created or
discovered the use of all the natural productions associated with her.
(In one legend it is Pe̱rǰido, the son of Biliku, who discovers honey
with his mother’s help.) She thus occupies a position similar to that
of the other ancestors, towards whom the men of the present feel
grateful for the benefits they have bestowed on mankind. This view of
Biliku as benefactress is often extended in the North Andaman to the
belief that it was she who invented all the arts now practised by
women, and there are traces of a belief that it was her son Pe̱rǰido who
was similarly responsible for the arts practised by men.

This view of Biliku as a benefactress, although it conflicts to some
extent with the view of her as on the whole hostile to mankind, yet,
since it springs from the essential basis of the myth, cannot be
overlooked. During the stormy season the Andaman Islander may well
forget every aspect of Biliku save that she is responsible for the
storms of which he goes in fear, but during the fine weather of the
N.E. monsoon, when there is no longer any fear of a violent storm and
when he is enjoying an abundance of the good things that he regards as
especially belonging to Biliku, his feeling towards her must be of a
very different nature; she is then the being who gives him the fine
weather, the relished foods. Thus, contrary though they be, these two
aspects of Biliku are both integral parts of the myth.

But Biliku is also the first possessor of fire, and we have seen that
fire is regarded by the Andamanese as the source of the life of
society, and therefore, in a way, of all life. Biliku as the source
from which comes the fire is also the source of life. This view of
Biliku is certainly to be found in all parts of the islands, though it
has been developed more in the South than in the North. Biliku thus
becomes responsible for the beginning of the society, and since the
whole universe centres in the society, of the whole universe. She
becomes the being who created or arranged the order in which men live.

For the honour of this position Biliku has, however, a competitor.
Besides the lightning there is another natural source of fire, the sun.
We find therefore two different (and contrary) developments of the myth
of the beginning of the world. In one of these the sun is associated
with Biliku, is regarded as belonging to her or made by her. For
instance, in an Aka-Kede legend, she is stated to have made the sun by
throwing a flaming brand into the sky. By this means Biliku becomes the
sole source of fire and therefore of life. This is the position that
Puluga occupies in the versions of the legends recorded by Mr Man. In
those legends Puluga gives fire to the first human beings by making the
sun come down to earth and ignite a pile of wood. The alternative
development makes the sun independent of Biliku and it is then the sun,
or a mythical person associated directly with the sun, who becomes the
maker of the world, the source of life. Unfortunately, I did not obtain
much detailed information about this development of the myth. In the
North Andaman the being named Čara is associated with the sun and with
fine weather, and is certainly sometimes regarded as the maker of the
world. In the South Andaman it is Tomo who is associated with the sun.
Men and women, when they die, go to live with Tomo in the sky. It is
Tomo who is responsible for all things being as they are. He was the
first being; it was he who arranged the order of nature; and similarly
it was he who created the social order, so that a question as to why
some custom is observed is often answered by saying that it was Tomo
who made it so. In Mr Man’s account Tomo is degraded to the position of
being merely the first man made by Puluga, but in the accounts that
were given to me by the natives of the Akar-Bale and A-Pučikwar tribes
Tomo was a rival of Puluga; sometimes one and sometimes the other was
spoken of as being the supreme maker of all things. An Akar-Bale man of
very high intelligence, who had been educated as a Christian, in trying
to explain to me statements about Tomo made by another Akar-Bale who
was regarded as an authority on the legends of his tribe, said that
Tomo was the same thing to the Akar-Bale that God is to the Christian.
When I asked him if it was not rather Puluga who was the Andaman
equivalent of God, he said that some people might think so, but that
according to the old man to whom I was talking it was Tomo and not
Puluga who occupied the position [220].

There is only one more point that needs to be discussed, and that is
the connection of Biliku with the spirits. It is clear that Biliku and
Tarai must be distinguished from the spirits (Lau), yet at the same
time Biliku is brought into relation with the spirits by the existence
of two alternative explanations of bad weather. One of the explanations
is that storms are due to Biliku, while the other is that they are due
to the spirits, particularly the spirits of the sea. Both these
beliefs, contradictory as they seem, are held by the Andamanese. The
connection of the spirits with the weather is due to the fact that the
weather is a thing that can limit the activity of the society, and we
saw in the last chapter that there is a tendency to associate with the
spirits of the dead all things that in any way interfere with the
smooth progress of social life. When it is said that a storm can be
stopped by swishing arrows in the sea, or by placing in the sea a piece
of Anadendron creeper, it is to the spirits of the sea, who are afraid
of arrows and of the Anadendron, that the storm is attributed, and not
to Biliku.

In the A-Pučikwar tribe I found an association of Bilik with the
spirits. One man of this tribe (a medicine-man or dreamer) stated that
the Bilik are a distinct class of spirits, distinct from the Lau and
the J̌urua, yet similar to them. It is the Bilik who control the
weather. Certain men, when they die, become not Lau or J̌urua, but
Bilik. Thus in one of his dreams that he related to me he met and
conversed with the spirit of a deceased friend whom he spoke of as
Boičo Bilik, Boičo having been his name when he was alive. A
medicine-man is able to control the weather through his communication
with the Bilik in dreams. In this tribe therefore we find a doctrine
according to which Bilik is not the name of a single being but of a
class of beings similar in essentials to the other two classes of
spirits. It seemed to me possible that these beliefs are a
comparatively late introduction by some of the medicine-men of the
tribe. The Boičo about whom my informant Tora dreamed seemed to have
had some part in the development of the doctrine. This does not,
however, in the least detract from its value as affording us an insight
into the beliefs of the Andamanese.

These beliefs clearly spring from an attempt to distinguish from one
another the different northerly and easterly winds, each of the
recognizable winds being regarded as a separate person, and from the
merging together of the two contrary beliefs in the weather as
regulated by spirits and by Bilik and Teria. The general system of
beliefs about spirits as being responsible for all things that may
affect human well-being inevitably leads to the notion that the weather
is controlled by the spirits, and this is implied also in the belief
that a medicine-man (whose power is derived from contact with the
spirits) is also able to influence the weather to some extent. This
doctrine, however, conflicts with the view of the weather and the
seasons as controlled by Biliku and Tarai, who are not spirits but
personifications of natural phenomena. It is perhaps this conflict
between doctrines, both of them important and indeed necessary, that
has led to the elaboration of the peculiar beliefs met with in the
A-Pučikwar tribe.

I have dealt with most of the more important details of the
Biliku-Tarai myth, and have tried to show that the whole myth is an
expression of the social value of the phenomena of the weather and the
seasons. These phenomena affect the social life in certain definite
ways and thereby become the objects of certain sentiments; these
sentiments are expressed in the legends. Biliku and Tarai are
personifications of the N.E. and S.W. monsoons; as such they are
responsible for the weather; feelings awakened by the weather are
therefore referred to Biliku and Tarai; thus the fear of a cyclone at
certain periods of the year is expressed as a fear of the anger of
Biliku. Since the time when men go in fear of storms is also the time
when they are just beginning to dig up yams and eat them, the myth
connects the anger of Biliku with the digging up of yams, and similarly
in the cases of honey and the cicada. As Biliku is associated with
vegetable foods, and these are things with which women chiefly have to
do, Biliku (in the North Andaman) is regarded as female; Tarai, being
associated with flesh foods, is male; the two are therefore conceived
as wife and husband. As the maker of storms Biliku is responsible for
the lightning and is therefore possessed of fire. She thus comes to be
regarded as the first possessor of fire. This gives rise to stories of
how the ancestors obtained their fire from Biliku, and as she is
generally regarded as being hostile rather than friendly towards
mankind, the stories relate how the fire was stolen from her. But
besides being the maker of storms Biliku is also the dispenser of the
good things of the season of the N.E. monsoon and when this aspect of
the procession of the seasons is prominent before their minds the
natives think of Biliku as a benefactress of mankind. As she is the
possessor of fire, and as fire is the source of the life of the
society, she comes to be regarded as herself the source of life, though
there is an alternative myth that gives this position to a being
associated with the sun.

Such is a brief outline of the explanation that I have tried to
demonstrate. It may be objected that there are a few important details
and several minor details that I have not explained. To that extent my
explanation is incomplete, but I hope that I have given sufficient
evidence for it to justify us in using it as an integral part of the
explanation of the meaning and function of the Andaman mythology in
general.

It is not necessary, for the purpose of this chapter, to examine one by
one all the legends recorded. Indeed, there are many details of the
Andaman mythology that I cannot explain, owing simply, I believe, to my
lack of insight into the ways of thought of the natives. The examples
already considered are sufficient for the argument. If the
interpretations given of these be correct we can base on them certain
general conclusions.

I have explained some of the more important of the legends as being
expressions or statements of the social value of natural phenomena. The
alternation of day and night, for example, affects the life of the
society in a certain definite manner and this gives rise to a certain
way of thinking and feeling about the phenomenon in question. These
thoughts and feelings, however, remain vague and without fixity until
they are formulated and expressed either in the form of some definite
rule of behaviour, such as the prohibition against noise while the
cicada is singing, or in some concrete statement, such as that afforded
by the legend of the origin of night. Similarly the legends relating to
the origin of fire or the saving of the fire during the flood serve to
give definite and permanent form to the vague feelings that result from
the way in which the possession of fire affects the social life.
Finally, I have tried to show that the myths relating to Biliku and
Tarai are nothing but the expression in concrete form of the ideas and
feelings that result from the effects of the weather and the seasons on
the life of the Andaman Islanders. From these examples I now propose to
draw a general conclusion. All the legends, I wish to maintain, are
simply the expression in concrete form of the feelings and ideas
aroused by things of all kinds as the result of the way in which these
things affect the moral and social life of the Andaman Islanders. In
other words the legends have for their function to express the social
values of different objects,—to express in general the system of social
values that is characteristic of the Andaman social organisation. To
justify this general statement it will be necessary to show how it
comes about that these representations are expressed in the form of
myths and legends dealing with the ancestors and with such
anthropomorphic beings as Biliku and Tarai.

Throughout the myths we meet with examples of what I have called the
personification of natural phenomena. It is now necessary to give a
more exact definition of this term. By it I mean the association of a
natural phenomenon with the idea of a person in such a way that the
characteristics of the phenomenon may be regarded as though they were
actions or characteristics of the person. The simplest form is that in
which the phenomenon itself is spoken of and thought of as if it were
an actual person. Thus the sun and the moon are spoken of as Lady Sun
and Sir Moon. Similarly, in the North Andaman, the night is personified
and is called Lady Night (Mimi Bat). In many cases of personification
however, while the person may or may not possess the same name as the
phenomenon, the latter is said to be produced by the former. Thus, in
the North Andaman, Ele is the name of the lightning, and Ele is spoken
of as a person; yet, if we enquire further, we are told that Ele (the
person) produces the lightning by shaking his leg. A somewhat similar
case is that of Biliku and Tarai. These two beings are said to produce
the winds that blow from the different quarters of the compass. But
when we enquire as to the names of the winds, we find that in the South
Andaman (A-Pučikwar tribe) the S.W. wind is called Teria, and the other
winds are all called Bilik. Thus the name of the person is also used as
the name of the phenomenon of which he is (in the phraseology here
used) the personification. In the North Andaman we find a difference,
the winds being called “the Biliku wind” and “the Tarai wind.” It is
necessary to insist on this translation of the native Biliku bo̱to and
Tarai bo̱to. We should expect, if Biliku were simply a person who
produced the winds, that the latter would be called “the wind of
Biliku,” a possessive form (Biliku ičo bo̱to) being used, but this is
not so, and the phrase habitually used can only be properly translated
“the Biliku wind” just as we might say “the north wind.” Thus, even in
the North Andaman Biliku and Tarai are used as the names of the two
chief winds.

In all these cases, sun and moon, Biliku and Tarai, etc., I propose to
use the term personification, as being the most convenient and not
liable to be misunderstood after having been carefully defined. We have
now to seek an explanation of this process of personification. A great
deal has been written on the subject of personification in mythology,
and it is therefore not without diffidence that I venture to put
forward an explanation which can only be very briefly stated in this
place and would require for its full exhibition a lengthy psychological
explanation.

An insight into the process of personification is afforded by
considering our own use of figurative language. We talk of the angry
storm, the raging sea. In such cases we allow ourselves for a moment to
regard the natural phenomenon as if it were a person or the action of a
person, and we do not even trouble distinctly to express the “as if.”
We use such phrases in order to attain a more forcible expression of
our thoughts and feelings. How is it that such expressions succeed in
the purpose for which they are used?

The reason would seem to be that our knowledge and understanding of
persons is much more intimate than our knowledge of things. The fact
that we are able, by the action of sympathy, to know what persons with
whom we are in contact are feeling, gives us an understanding of them
that we can never reach with inanimate objects.

In all human society the most important elements of the experience of
the individual are due to his relations with other persons. In the
development of the emotional life of the child, persons intervene at
every turn, and there is thus built up a system of sentiments and
representations which forms the very foundation of the individual’s
affective life. In other words the first organised experience that the
individual attains is all connected with persons and their relations to
himself. This early experience provides a basis on which we may and do
organise later experiences. The perception of the leaping waves and
lashing spray of a sea in tempest arouses in us a vague emotional
reaction, but it is an experience that we have not learned to formulate
exactly. The feeling awakened in us is, so to speak, unclassified,
there is no exact word by which we can express it. We therefore fall
back upon that system of affective experiences that have been
classified, and for which we do have adequate words, and we apply the
word “angry” to the scene before us. At the utterance of the word, with
its appeal to infantile memories and to the long series of experiences
that have been associated with it, the emotion becomes more definite,
if not more intense. We are thus enabled to classify our present
experience, to associate it with past experiences that have been
arranged in our minds in an organised system, and to find a place for
it in that system.

Applying this to the case of the myths we must first of all note that
the Andaman Islander has no interest in nature save in so far as it
directly affects the social life. Scientific and artistic interest in
nature are products of civilisation. The Andaman Islander has no desire
to understand the processes of nature as a scientist would wish to do,
nor has he any conception of nature as a subject of esthetic
contemplation. Natural phenomena affect him immediately by their
influence on his own life and on the life of his fellows, and are
thereby the source of a number of emotional experiences. In order to
express these he has to make use of that part of his own experience
that is already thoroughly organised, namely, that relating to the
actions of one person as affecting another or as affecting the society.
Only in this way is he able to organise his experiences arising from
the processes of nature, to classify and render definite the vague
impressions that are aroused in him. He interprets nature in terms of
the world with which he is most familiar, the world of persons, being
enabled to do so by the presence within him of a regulated and definite
body of experience which he has derived from his relations with persons
from the time of his first awakening to the consciousness of the
external world.

There is a parallelism here, as in many other matters, between the
psychological development of the individual and that of the race. The
fundamental need for the child is to learn to accommodate himself to
his environment. In this environment by far the most important objects
are persons—parents and other children—and the first business of the
growing child is to learn to adapt his actions to the requirements of
this intercourse with persons. This is so overwhelmingly important that
the other need (of adapting himself to inanimate objects) is quite
overshadowed by it. The child has to make experiments and observations
upon persons, to learn how they will act. He meets with such a
phenomenon as anger, for example, the anger of a parent, or of another
child, and by means of a succession of experiences he comes to a
satisfactory understanding of this particular thing, and what it means
with reference to himself and his actions. This notion of the anger of
a parent becomes the nucleus around which is organised the experience
of similar phenomena. In play or sometimes in earnest, the child treats
all sorts of inanimate objects and events connected with them as if
they were persons or the actions of persons. By this means, and by this
means alone, he is able to exercise himself in his newly acquired
experience and to extend and organise it yet further.

In the history of the race the development of society depends upon the
organisation of personal relations. The task of man in primitive
society is therefore similar to the task of the child. The needs of his
life compel him above everything else to devote himself to organising
that part of his experience that relates to the actions of persons upon
one another; all else is subordinated to this supreme need; and just as
the child organises and develops his experience by treating inanimate
objects as if they were persons in such a way that we can hardly tell
if he is in play or in earnest, so primitive man, in exactly the same
way, organises and develops his social experience by conceiving the
whole universe as if it were the interaction of personal forces.

This explanation of the nature of personification helps us to
understand some of the Andamanese beliefs. Natural phenomena such as
the alternation of day and night, the changes of the moon, the
procession of the seasons, and variations of the weather, have
important effects on the welfare of the society. The latter, in so far
as it is regulated from within, depends on the adaptation of persons to
one another. Men must learn to live in harmony, to sacrifice their own
desires at times to the needs of others, to avoid occasions of giving
offence, and not readily to give way to anger when offence is given.
The Andaman Islander represents this fundamental law of the society as
though it were the fundamental law of the whole universe. When any evil
befalls the society it is as though some personal power were in
question, as though some one were angry at some offence. Thus the moon
and Biliku are represented as persons who can be offended and whose
anger has unpleasant results. Conversely when all goes well it is
because there is harmony or solidarity between men and the nature
beings which affect men’s lives. In a word, the forces with which the
Andaman Islander is most familiar as affecting his welfare are those of
solidarity and opposition; it is solidarity that maintains the harmony
of social life, opposition that destroys it. The forces of nature in so
far as they affect the society are therefore represented as being of
the same nature; there can be either solidarity or opposition between
men and nature; the former leads to well-being, the latter to
misfortune.

Thus the personification of natural phenomena is one of the methods by
which the Andaman Islander projects into the world of nature the moral
forces that he experiences in the society. The process is essentially
similar to that described in the last chapter in connection with the
ceremonial, save that there the forces we were considering were largely
impersonal. Perhaps, rather than speaking of it as a projection of
moral forces into nature, we should regard it as a process of bringing
within the circle of the social life those aspects of nature that are
of importance to the well-being of the society, making the moon and the
monsoons a part of the social order and therefore subject to the same
moral forces that have sway therein.

The personification of natural phenomena is not, however, the only
method by which their social value can be expressed. The Akar-Bale
legend of the origin of day and night, as we saw at the beginning of
the chapter, expresses the social value of the alternation of light and
darkness by means of a story of how it originated in the time of the
ancestors. If we seek to understand all that this legend means we must
ask why the Andaman Islanders believe in the existence of the
ancestors, and why they attribute to them the characteristics that are
exhibited in the stories they tell about them. The ground of the belief
in the ancestors is to be found in the existence of a sentiment
fundamental in all human society, which I shall call the feeling of
tradition. When an Andaman Islander is asked the question “Why do you
do so and so?” he very frequently replies “Because our fathers did so
before us.” This answer expresses in its simplest form the feeling of
tradition. In all his actions, in the way he obtains and cooks his
food, in the way in which he makes his various implements and weapons,
in the moral and ritual customs that he is required to observe, the
native acts in accordance with tradition. If he should ever feel
inclined to deviate from it he finds himself in conflict with a
powerful compulsive force. In tradition, therefore, the individual is
aware of a force stronger than himself, to which he must submit whether
he will or not. Further, he is aware that the power which he possesses,
as a member of the society, whereby he is able to face the hostile or
at best indifferent forces of nature and provide himself with food and
maintain himself in security and happiness, is not simply a product of
his own personality, but is derived by him from the past. Towards this
past, therefore, on which his own life so obviously depends, he feels a
grateful dependence. So long as he acts in conformity with tradition he
can enjoy safety and happiness, because he is relying on something much
greater than his own qualities of mind and body.

To put the matter in a few words, the individual finds himself in
relation with an ordered system—the social order—to which he has to
adapt himself. The two chief moments in his affective attitude towards
that order are his sense of his own dependence upon it and of the need
of conforming to its requirements in his actions. It is this,—his sense
of his own relation to the social order,—that the Andaman Islander
expresses in the legends about the ancestors, which recount how that
order came into existence as the result of actions of anthropomorphic
beings.

Some of the legends recount the invention of weapons or implements or
the discovery of the uses of natural objects. In one of the North
Andaman stories it is said that all the weapons and implements now used
by men were invented by the first man, whose name, J̌utpu, probably
means “alone,” i.e., the man who was at first by himself. This first
man made himself a wife from the nest of the white ant. The regulated
society of the ants, and the numerous population that a nest contains,
give this story its symbolic meaning.

Besides what may be called general culture legends, of which the story
of J̌utpu is an example, there are several special culture legends
relating to various discoveries and inventions, such as the tale of how
the use of yams for food was first discovered, or that which tells how
the monitor lizard discovered quartz and scarified himself with it. By
means of these legends the Andaman Islander expresses his sense of his
own dependence on the past. He pictures a time when the social order as
it now is had not begun, or was just beginning; the knowledge he now
possesses was then being acquired, the weapons he uses were being
invented, the moral and ritual laws that he obeys were in process of
being formulated.

It is obvious that the Andaman Islander cannot regard the ancestors as
being persons exactly like himself, for they were responsible for the
establishment of the social order to which he merely conforms and of
which he has the advantage. He says, therefore, that they were bigger
men than himself, meaning by this that they were bigger mentally or
spiritually, rather than physically, that they were endowed with powers
much greater than those even of the medicine-men of the present time.
This explains the magical powers that are attributed to many, or indeed
to all, of the ancestors; the belief in the existence in the past of
men or beings endowed with what we may almost call supernatural powers
is the inevitable result of the way in which the man of to-day feels
towards the men of the past on whose inventions and discoveries he is
dependent for his daily nourishment [221].

Besides the social order there is another, the order of nature, which
is constantly acting upon the social order. To this also the individual
has to adapt himself, and his knowledge of how to do so is equally
derived from the past. The order of nature only affects him through the
social order, and the two therefore necessarily seem to him merely two
parts of one whole,—the order of the universe. In the legends he tells
how not only the social order but also the order of nature came into
existence; an example is the story of the origin of night.

The Andaman Islander finds himself in an ordered world, a world subject
to law, controlled by unseen forces. The laws are not to him what
natural laws are to the scientist of to-day, they are rather of the
nature of moral laws. He recognizes only one meaning of the word right
and of the word wrong; right action is that which is in conformity with
law, wrong action is that in opposition to the law; it is wrong to give
way to anger, it is wrong to kill a cicada, or to have a bright light
in camp when the moon is rising in the third quarter, and it is wrong
also to try and use unsuitable material for an implement or weapon.
Wrong actions always lead to harm; if you use unsuitable wood for your
bow it will break and your labour be wasted; if you kill a cicada it
will rain heavily; if you give way to anger readily you will earn the
dislike of your fellows that may some day lead to your undoing. Right
and wrong mean acting in accordance with the laws of the world or in
opposition to them, and this means acting in accordance with or in
opposition to custom. Custom and law are indeed here two words for the
same thing.

The forces of the world, as the Andaman Islander conceives them, are
not the blind mechanical forces of modern science: rather are they
moral forces. Their action upon human beings is not only to be
witnessed in external events, but is to be experienced in the man’s own
consciousness or conscience. He feels within himself their compulsion
when he would run counter to them, and their support when he leans upon
them. The law of the world, then, is a moral law, its forces are moral
forces, its values moral values; its order is a moral order.

This view of the world is the immediate and inevitable result of the
experience of man in society. It is a philosophy not reached by painful
intellectual effort, by the searching out of meanings and reasons and
causes; it is impressed upon him in all the happenings of his life, is
assumed in all his actions; it needs only to be formulated. And the
argument of this chapter has been that it is as the expression or
formulation of this view of the world as an order regulated by law that
the legends have their meaning, fulfil their function.

The legends of the Andamanese then, as I understand them, set out to
give an account of how the order of the world came into existence. But
the Andaman Islander has no interest in any part of it except in so far
as it affects his own life. He is interested in the procession of the
seasons or the alternation of day and night, or the phases of the moon,
only in so far as these things have effects upon the community. In
other words he is interested in natural phenomena only in so far as
such phenomena are really parts of the social order. This I have
expressed earlier in the chapter by saying that the legends deal not
with all aspects of natural phenomena but only with their social
values.

A fundamental character of the natural order (as of the social order)
is uniformity; the same processes are for ever repeated. This character
of nature the legends take for granted; they assume that if a force is
once set into action it will continue to act indefinitely. They assume
also a period in which the present order did not exist. Anything that
happened in that period has gone on happening ever since. One of the
ancestors discovered how to cook yams, and men have been cooking yams
in the same way down to the present day. A cicada was crushed and cried
out and the night came, and since then the darkness has come every
evening as soon as the cicada sings. In one of the legends the tree
lizard was quarrelsome, and has remained so. Thus the legends represent
the social order, including such natural phenomena as may be said to
belong to it, as being due to the interaction of forces of a special
character that came into existence in the beginning and have continued
to act uniformly ever since. In this way they express two most
important conceptions, that of uniformity (or law) and that of the
dependence of the present on the past.

It is the need of expressing these two conceptions that gives the
legends their function. They are not merely theoretical principles but
are both intensely practical. The law of uniformity means that certain
actions must be done and others not done if life is to run smoothly;
any deviation from uniformity in conduct is dangerous as being contrary
to the law that regulates the universe. What actions are to be done and
what are to be left undone was determined once for all in the past when
the present order came into existence. The knowledge of what to do and
what to avoid doing is what constitutes the tradition of the society,
to which every individual is required to conform.

The legends, then, set out to express and to justify these two
fundamental conceptions. They do so by telling how the social order
itself came into existence, and how, also, all those natural phenomena
that have any bearing on the social well-being came to be as they are
and came to have the relation to the society that they possess.

One group of facts that have an obvious relation to the society
consists of the geographical features of the islands. The more notable
features of the part of the country in which a man lives, and which he
regards as his own, are intimately connected with his moral sentiments.
His attachment to his group necessarily involves an attachment to the
country of the group. The same sort of thing exists amongst ourselves.
This attachment of the members of a group to their own country
explains, I think, the part played by what may be called “local
motives” in the legends of the Andamanese. Such motives are of
considerable importance, of much more importance than would appear from
the stories that I have transcribed. The recent changes in their mode
of life have had far more influence on the local organisation of the
tribes than on any other part of their social organisation, and this
has not been without its effect on the legends. We may say, briefly,
that the local motives of the legends serve to express the social
values of localities. In general each locality has its own versions of
the legends, in which the events related are supposed to have taken
place at some spot or other in the neighbourhood. Thus all the more
prominent features of a locality are associated with the events of the
legends. In some cases tales are told that explain these features as
having come into existence when the ancestors were alive; a reef of
rocks was formerly a canoe, for instance. A few such legends were
recorded in an earlier chapter, but it is probable that there were a
vast number of similar tales that I did not hear. In some cases a
locality has a special social value and therefore a special place in
the legends. Thus Wota-Emi was the great meeting-place for the natives
who lived on Baratang and on parts of the South Andaman and the Middle
Andaman, and was also sometimes visited by the natives of the
Archipelago. Consequently Wota-Emi is represented in the legends of the
A-Pučikwar tribe as being the great meeting-place or dwelling-place of
the ancestors. The effect of these associations between the places with
which he is familiar and the events of the legendary epoch in the mind
of the Andaman Islander probably is similar to the effect on ourselves
of the historical associations of our own country; they serve to make
him aware of his attachment to his country or to express his sense of
that attachment.

There still remains a most important feature of the legends which has
not yet been explained, namely the position of the animals as
ancestors. Many of the actors in the legends bear the names of animals
but at the same time are spoken of as though they were human beings.
Many of the legends explain how some species of animal arose from some
one of the ancestors who became an animal and the progenitor of the
species. Thus, in the North Andaman, Kolo was one of the ancestors; he
made wings for himself out of palm-leaves, and so was able to fly; he
lived a solitary life in his home at the top of a tree, and was in the
habit of stealing men’s wives; in the end he became the sea-eagle, and
this species still bears the name kolo. It is necessary to define as
exactly as possible what meaning these stories have to the natives. It
is not simply that the legendary person is a man with the name and some
of the characteristics of an animal; nor is it simply that the
legendary person is the ancestor of the species of which he bears the
name. We can only adequately express the thought of the Andamanese by
saying that he regards the whole species as if it were a human being.
When, in the legends, he speaks of “Sea-eagle” he is thereby
personifying the species in the sense in which the word personification
has been used throughout this chapter; he is regarding the
characteristics of the species as if they were characteristics or
actions or results of actions of a person. Admittedly this is a vague
description, but the vagueness is in the mental phenomenon described;
the Andamanese do not, in this matter, think clearly and analyse their
own thoughts. However, we can help ourselves to understand their
thoughts by recalling the tales that amused us as children, in which
the fox or the rabbit of the tale was an embodiment of the whole
species.

The part played in the legends by any particular animal is determined
either immediately or indirectly by its observable characteristics.
Thus the connection of the kingfisher with fire is due to the fact that
he is a fish-eating bird, and that he has a patch of bright red
feathers, red being, in the Andamanese mind, always associated with
fire. The other birds that are mentioned in the different versions of
the fire legend either possess remarkable plumage (as the dove, and the
parrot) or are fish-eating birds. The Andamanese regard fish as the
fundamental human food, having only one word for “food” and “fish,” and
they never eat their fish raw as the kingfisher does. In the Akar-Bale
story of the origin of the animals the tree lizard is characterised by
his quarrelsomeness, and by the fact that he is very difficult to catch
hold of; these are both actual characteristics of the animal itself.
The crab appears in the same legend as a person with a very powerful
grip, and with a hard shell to his body. The monitor lizard has his
place in the legends determined by the fact that he can climb trees,
run on the ground and swim in the water, and is thus equally at home at
the top of the trees, on the ground, or in the creek. I have already
given this as one of the reasons why he is chosen as the first ancestor
of all the animals and of human beings. The lizard also seems to be
regarded by the Andamanese as a particularly libidinous animal, and is
therefore regarded as the inventor of sexual intercourse and of
procreation. Why he should have this sexual reputation I do not know
[222]. The tale of how the lizard invented scarification depends on the
fact that the marks on the lizard’s skin bear a strong resemblance to
the marks that the natives make on their own skins with sharp fragments
of quartz. The position of the Paradoxurus or civet-cat in the stories
in which she appears is due to the fact that while she can live in the
trees or on the ground she cannot swim; hence, when the flood came, she
fled from the water and climbed a steep hill and thus kept the fire
alight. In the light of these examples we are justified, I think, in
assuming that in all cases, even when the meaning is not clear, the
part played by any animal in the legends is due to some actual
characteristic of it.

There is thus a parallelism between the personification of natural
phenomena and the personification of animal species. I have shown that
the characteristics of such beings as Biliku and Tarai are all to be
explained by a consideration of the actual characteristics of the
phenomena of which they are the personification (the winds) and of the
phenomena immediately connected therewith. The same thing has now been
shown to be true with regard to the personified animals. The process of
personification is carried out in exactly the same way in the two
different classes of cases. I gave as the reason for personifying
natural phenomena the fact that in this way, and in this way only, the
Andaman Islander is able to express the sentiments that are aroused in
him by them. We must see if we can justify the personification of
animals by a similar argument.

The habits of observation fostered in the mind of the Andaman Islander
by his method of winning his sustenance lead him to take a lively
interest in all the creatures of the jungle and the sea, about whose
ways he therefore has a great store of knowledge. Every tree and plant
of the forest, every bird and insect, every creature that lives in the
sea or on the reef has its name. His interest, however, in the case of
many of the animals has little or no relation to practical life, for he
does not make use of them for food or in any other way. There is here
therefore something that contradicts the fundamental assumption of the
philosophy that is expressed in the legends, there is a lack of mental
unity. These interests in the birds and insects are not correlated with
the central mass of interests that control the Andamanese mind and give
it its unity. Although his philosophy assumes that everything in which
he takes an interest has some meaning in reference to his own life, yet
here are things that at first sight have no such meaning. The
correlation that is lacking in his experience is brought about by means
of the legends; a meaning is provided for the apparently meaningless.
The fundamental interest of the Andaman Islander, as of all men in
primitive societies, is his interest in persons and personal relations.
By regarding the animals as persons and relating stories about them he
is able to correlate his interest in them with the fundamental basis of
his mental life.

This explanation does not perhaps sound very satisfactory. We do not at
present understand the forces that compel the normal mind to strive
after unity in its experience. Let us examine the matter a little more
closely. All the thoughts and feelings of the Andaman Islander (or at
any rate all those that are expressed in the legends) centre in the
society; for him the world is merely a stage on which the social drama
is perpetually enacted. He coordinates all his thoughts, emotions, and
interests around the society, and in the legends he builds up a picture
showing the connection between the society and those phenomena of
nature that affect it. The majority of the animals (the birds, the
insects, and innumerable kinds of fish), not being used for food, or in
any other way, bear no apparent relation to the social life. Yet by
reason of the woodcraft developed by the necessities of his life he is
compelled to take notice of these creatures and to become interested in
their ways. Here, therefore, are two conflicting elements in his
consciousness, (1) his belief that the whole of nature derives its
meaning and interest from its relation to the society, and (2) his
consciousness of an alien world (of the birds, etc.) which seems to
have no direct relation to the society, and which nevertheless he
cannot help being constantly aware of. The Andaman Islander, as I have
stated more than once, does not possess any scientific or abstract
interest in nature. He never asks himself “What is the meaning of
this?” in the same way that a scientist of our own civilisation might
do. He asks “What is the meaning of this thing in relation to me and my
interests and feelings, and to the social life of which my life is a
fragment?” It is because he does feel the need of answers to questions
of this kind that the conflict we have noticed arises. This conflict
has to be resolved, and there are apparently three alternatives: (1) to
admit that there is a meaning in nature apart from its relation to the
society, (2) to refuse to take any interest in birds and insects, (3)
to explain away the apparent lack of relation. It is this third
alternative that is chosen by the Andaman Islander, and there are
obvious reasons why it should be so. The explanation is accomplished in
a direct and simple manner. In the beginning men and animals were one;
then came an event or series of events (the discovery of fire, the
great flood, or a great quarrel amongst the ancestors) whereby the men
and the animals became cut off from one another, to live henceforward
in the same world, but separated by an unseen barrier.

The argument may be put in another way that may perhaps be more
convincing. The actual sentiment that is aroused in the mind of the
native by the animals is that here is an important and interesting part
of the universe that is alien to him, from which he is cut off in some
strange way. It is this real sentiment, itself the inevitable result of
his life and his surroundings, that is expressed in the belief in the
animals as ancestors.

If this explanation be correct we should expect to find that the
animals that figure in the legends are those that have no immediate
social value either as food or in any other way, while on the other
hand the animals that are used for food will not appear in the legends,
or will occupy therein a very different place from the others. The only
land animal that is regularly used for food is the pig. It is therefore
a confirmation of the explanation that we find that the pig is never
under any circumstances regarded as one of the ancestors, that is to
say, is never personified in the same way that other animals are. One
legend about the pig [223] explains, not how the animal came into
existence (that seems to be assumed), but how it acquired its senses.
Another legend [224] tells how the civet-cat persuaded some of the
ancestors to play a game in which they pretended to be pigs, and they
were turned into these animals. Here we are clearly dealing with
something different from the ordinary process of personification, for
we have not one ancestor in whom the species is personified, but a
number of persons who were suddenly changed from men and women into
pigs by the magical performance of the civet-cat. In the sea there are
several animals that are regularly used for food. The dugong is spoken
of as an ancestor in an Akar-Bale legend, but in the North Andaman
there is a story of how the dugong originated from a pig that Pe̱rǰido
tried to roast without first disembowelling it and cutting the joints
of its legs. There is also in the North Andaman a story of how turtles
originated [225]. The existence of these legends shows that the pig,
the turtle and the dugong occupy a different position in the minds of
the Andamanese from that of the other animals. This serves, in some
measure, to confirm the explanation given above.

We may briefly consider what may be regarded as a kind of negative
instance by which to test the argument. The world of the stars
constitutes a part of the universe just as alien, just as devoid of
apparent meaning as that of the birds. We may ask therefore how it is
that the Andaman Islanders have no star myths of the kind that are
common in other primitive societies. The answer is, I think, that the
Andamanese do not have their attention called to the stars. As their
camps are in the dense forest there are very few occasions on which
they see the sky at night. When fishing at night on the reefs or in
canoes they are too busy to pay much attention to the stars. They have
not learnt to relate the procession of the stars and the change of the
seasons, nor have they learnt to tell the time at night from their
declination. Their navigation is only along the coast and they have
therefore no use for the stars as guides of direction. On the contrary,
wherever we find a developed star-mythology we find that the stars are
studied either as guides to navigation or journeying overland, or as
giving indications of the changes of the seasons.

We have considered all the more important aspects of the subject matter
of the legends; it remains for us to turn to the form and enquire how
it comes about that the representations which analysis reveals are
expressed in just the way they are, in a word, why the expression takes
the form of a story. It is obvious that in this place no attempt can be
made to deal with the general problems of the psychology of
story-telling. All that I wish to do is to point out one or two reasons
why the legend is an appropriate form (perhaps we might say, the only
possible form) for the expression of the view of the world that is
revealed in the Andaman mythology.

The Andamanese, like other savages, have not acquired the power of
thinking abstractly. All their thought necessarily deals with concrete
things. Now the story form provides a means of expressing concretely
what could otherwise only be put in an abstract statement. (A large
part of the interpretation of the legends, as here undertaken, consists
in restating the content of the legends in abstract terms.) Moreover,
even if the Andaman Islanders were capable of thinking abstractly, yet,
since what they need to express are not thoughts so much as feelings
(not intellectual so much as affective processes), they would still
need a concrete form of expression. For it is a familiar fact that the
concrete has a much greater power of awakening or appealing to our
feelings than has the abstract. In particular the story has ever been a
popular medium by which to appeal to sentiments of all kinds.

The chief ground for the interest in stories shown by children and by
savages is, I believe, that they afford the means of exercising the
imagination in certain specific directions and thereby play an
important part in enabling the individual to organise his experience.
The course of the development of the human mind (from childhood to
adolescence, and from the earliest human ancestor to ourselves) depends
upon or involves the existence at certain stages of growth (and to a
certain extent throughout the whole process) of a conscious egoistic
interest. Mankind, to develop what we call character and conscience,
must learn to take a conscious interest in himself, in his own actions,
and their motives. The development of this self-consciousness in
children is a process of great interest to the psychologist and has
already been studied in an imperfect fashion. You have only to watch a
child playing a game in which he or she enacts some imaginary part to
see how such games afford a means by which the child develops and
widens his interest in himself. Children, and many grown-up people
(particularly during conditions of lessened mental activity), indulge
in what are called daydreams, which take the form of an imaginary
succession of adventures of which the dreamer is always the hero. The
character of daydreams is that they are always frankly egoistic and
boastful. Now this sort of interest in stories is found in the
Andamanese, though not in the legends. At the end of a day a group of
Andamanese may often be seen seated round a fire listening while one of
them recounts adventures. The narration may be merely an exaggerated
account of real happenings, but is more often purely fictitious. The
narrator will tell, with few words, but with many expressive gestures,
how he harpooned a turtle or shot a pig. He may, if his hearers are
content to remain and listen, as they sometimes are, go on killing pig
after pig for an hour or two together. The point to be noted is that
these tales are always frankly egoistic and boastful, and it is for
this reason that they may well be compared with the daydreams of the
more civilised.

Besides this egoistic interest in stories there is another that is
closely connected with it in origin and function. The necessities of
social life, particularly in childhood and in primitive societies where
a small number of people are constantly reacting upon one another,
involve an intense degree of interest in persons and personal
qualities. This interest is aroused and fostered by the constant play
of personal forces in the social life. Its strength accounts, I
believe, for the power of appeal to sentiments that is possessed by
stories.

It is a commonplace that in many forms of play the child or the adult
(and it is also true of animals) exercises faculties that are important
parts of the system of habits or dispositions by which the individual
adapts himself to his surroundings. We may regard the interest in
stories as similar to play-interests in general. Life in society
requires the individual to develop a faculty of what may be called
character-estimation, whereby he may judge the motives that are likely
to influence the conduct of another person. I have myself noticed that
savages such as the Andaman Islanders and the Australian aborigines are
as a rule good judges of character. They can quickly estimate how to
adapt their conduct and conversation to the character of a person they
meet for the first time. They are often excellent mimics, being able to
imitate exactly the tone of voice or manner of walking or any other
idiosyncrasy of a person whom they have only seen for a short time. I
believe, then, that the legends of the Andamanese may be regarded as a
means whereby they give exercise to their interest in human character,
just as in other kinds of play they exercise other interests and
faculties that are integral parts of their adaptation to their
environment. By means of the personification of natural phenomena and
of species of animals, and through the assumption of the existence of
the ancestors and their times, they are able to develop a special kind
of unwritten literature, which has for them just the same sort of
appeal that much of our own literature has for us. Doubtless it is not
a very polished form of art; the characterisation that it exhibits is
simple and even crude; the story is not told very skilfully, and indeed
the story-teller relies much on his use of expressive gesture to convey
his meaning; nevertheless it does fulfil amongst the Andamanese the
same sort of function that more developed literary art does in
civilised society.

There remains one other matter to be dealt with briefly. I have pointed
out on several occasions that the legends contain inconsistencies. Some
of these only appear when the real meaning of the legend is discovered,
but others are on the surface. It is clear that the Andamanese do not
always apply to their legends the laws of logical consistency. It must
not, however, be supposed that they are equally illogical in other
matters, for this is not so. In matters of everyday practical life the
Andamanese show just as much sound commonsense as the inhabitants of a
civilised country. They are excellent observers of natural phenomena
and are capable of putting their observations to practical use. In any
attempt to explain their mythology, therefore, it is necessary to show
why in this sphere they do not apply their powers of reasoning. We can
understand this when we recall the purpose of the legends as here
described, which is, not to give rational explanations, but to express
sentiments. When there are two alternative rational explanations of a
phenomenon between which we cannot definitely choose we say that either
one or other is probably true. In those mental processes in which the
purpose is to find a symbolic expression for sentiments or desires, the
either-or relation is inadmissible owing to the very nature of the
thought-process itself. If two expressions of the same sentiment are
present, both equally adequate, we must either reject one of them or by
making use of both on different occasions admit the possibility of
inconsistency. Where the inconsistency becomes more or less obvious we
expect the reason to step in and insist that a choice shall be made.
But a mind intent on expressing certain feelings, faced with two
alternative and equally satisfactory but inconsistent symbols, will
hesitate to choose between them even at the command of the desire for
logical consistency. It will cling as long as possible to both of them.
This is just what the Andaman Islander seems to do in his mythology.
The view of lightning as a person who shakes his leg seems to express
in some way certain notions of the natives about the lightning. The
alternative explanation of lightning as a fire-brand thrown by Biliku
also satisfies in some way his need of expressing the impressions that
the phenomena make upon him. In spite of the inconsistency he clings to
both symbols as best he can.

The very existence of inconsistencies of this kind proves without any
doubt that the mental processes underlying the legends of the
Andamanese are not similar to those that we ourselves follow when we
attempt to understand intelligently the facts of nature and of life,
but rather are to be compared to those that are to be found in dreams
and in art,—processes of what might conveniently be called symbolic
thought. It would perhaps hardly be necessary to point this out were it
not that many ethnologists still try to interpret the beliefs of
savages as being the result of attempts to understand natural facts,
such as dreams, death, birth, etc. Such writers assume that the savage
is impelled by the same motive that so strongly dominates themselves,
the desire to understand,—scientific curiosity—and that such beliefs as
animism or totemism are of the nature of scientific hypotheses invented
to explain the facts of dreaming and of death on the one hand and of
conception and birth on the other. If this view of the nature of
primitive thought were correct it would be impossible to conceive how
such inconsistencies as those that we meet with among the Andamanese
could be permitted. On the view that the myths of primitive societies
are merely the result of an endeavour to express certain ways of
thinking and feeling about the facts of life which are brought into
existence by the manner in which life is regulated in society, the
presence of such inconsistencies need not in the least surprise us, for
the myths satisfactorily fulfil their function not by any appeal to the
reasoning powers of the intellect but by appealing, through the
imagination, to the mind’s affective dispositions.

The thesis of this chapter has been that the legends are the expression
of social values of objects of different kinds. By the social value of
an object is meant the way in which it affects the life of the society,
and therefore, since every one is interested in the welfare of the
society to which he belongs, the way in which it affects the social
sentiments of the individual. The system of social values of a society
obviously depends upon the manner in which the society is constituted,
and therefore the legends can only be understood by constant reference
to the mode of life of the Andamanese.

The legends give us in the first place a simple and crude valuation of
human actions. Anger, quarrelsomeness, carelessness in observing ritual
requirements are exhibited as resulting in harm. This is the moral
element of the stories strictly so called, and is to be observed in
many of them. The young men who failed to observe the rules laid down
for those who have recently been through one of the initiation
ceremonies were turned to stone. The quarrelsomeness of the lizard led
to the ancestors being turned into animals. The bad temper of one of
the ancestors resulted in darkness covering the earth, or in a great
cyclone in which many were destroyed.

Secondly, the legends as a whole give expression to the social value of
the past, of all that is derived from tradition, whether it be the
knowledge by which men win their sustenance, or the customs that they
observe. In the wonderful times of the ancestors all things were
ordered, all necessary knowledge was acquired, and the rules that must
guide conduct were discovered. It remains for the individual of the
present only to observe the customs with which his elders are familiar.

The legends of a man’s own tribe serve also to give a social value to
the places with which he is familiar. The creeks and hills that he
knows, the camping sites at which he lives, the reefs and rocks that
act as landmarks by reason of any striking feature they may present,
are all for him possessed of a historic interest that makes them dear
to him. The very names, in many cases, recall events of the far-off
legendary epoch.

Again, many of the legends express the social value of natural
phenomena. By reference to Biliku and Tarai, for instance, the native
can express what he feels with respect to the weather and the seasonal
changes that so profoundly affect the common life. Finally, in the
legends he is able to express what he feels about the bright plumaged
birds and the other creatures with which he is constantly meeting in
the jungles, which are a source of perennial interest, and are yet so
clearly a part of the world cut off from himself and his life, having
no immediately discernible influence upon his welfare.

This system of social values, or rather this system of sentiments, that
we find expressed in the legends is an essential part of the life of
the Andamanese; without it they could not have organised their social
life in the way they have. Moreover the sentiments in question need to
be regularly expressed in some way or another if they are to be kept
alive and passed on from one generation to another. The legends, which
are related by the elders to the young folk, are one of the means (the
various ceremonial customs analysed in the last chapter being another)
by which they are so expressed, and by which their existence is
maintained.

Although the term “social value” has been used as a convenient
expression, yet the meaning of the legends might be expressed in other
ways. We may say, for instance, that they give a representation of the
world as regulated by law. The conception of law which they reveal is
not, however, that to which we are accustomed when we think of natural
law. We may perhaps adequately state the Andaman notion by saying that
moral law and natural law are not distinguished from one another. The
welfare of the society depends upon right actions; wrong actions
inevitably lead to evil results. Giving way to anger is a wrong action,
as being a cause of social disturbance. In the legends the catastrophes
that overwhelmed the ancestors are in many instances represented as
being caused by some one giving way to anger. There is a right way and
a wrong way to set about making such a thing as a bow. We should
explain this by saying that the right way will give a good serviceable
weapon, whereas the wrong way will give an inferior or useless one. The
Andaman Islander tends to look at the matter from a different angle;
the right way is right because it is the one that has been followed
from time immemorial, and any other way is wrong, is contrary to
custom, to law. Law, for the Andaman Islander, means that there is an
order of the universe, characterised by absolute uniformity; this order
was established once for all in the time of the ancestors, and is not
to be interfered with, the results of any such interference being evil,
ranging from merely minor ills such as disappointment or discomfort to
great calamities. The law of compensation is absolute. Any deviation
from law or custom will inevitably bring its results, and inversely any
evil that befalls must be the result of some lack of observance. The
legends reveal to our analysis a conception of the universe as a moral
order.

Here I must conclude my attempt to interpret the customs and beliefs of
the Andaman Islanders, but in doing so I wish to point out, though
indeed it must already be fairly obvious, that if my interpretation be
correct, then the meaning of the customs of other primitive peoples is
to be discovered by similar methods and in accordance with the same
psychological principles. It is because I have satisfied myself of the
soundness of these methods and principles, by applying them to the
interpretation of other cultures, that I put forward the hypotheses of
these two chapters with an assurance that would not perhaps be
justified if I relied solely on a study of the Andamanese. To put the
matter in another way, I have assumed a certain working hypothesis, and
I have shown that on the basis of this hypothesis there can be built up
a satisfactory explanation of the customs and beliefs of the
Andamanese. But the hypothesis is of such a nature, stating or
involving as it does certain sociological or psychological laws and
principles, that if it be true for one primitive people it must be true
for others, and indeed, with necessary modifications, must be true of
all human society. Such a hypothesis, it is obvious, cannot be
adequately tested by reference only to one limited set of facts, and it
will therefore be necessary, if it is to become something more than a
hypothesis, to test its application over a wider range of ethnological
facts.

The matter is so important that it is necessary, even at the risk of
wearisome repetition, to give a final statement of the hypothesis that,
in this chapter and the last, has been applied to and tested by the
facts known to us concerning the Andaman Islanders.

In an enquiry such as this, we are studying, I take it, not isolated
facts, but a “culture,” understanding by that word the whole mass of
institutions, customs and beliefs of a given people. For a culture to
exist at all, and to continue to exist, it must conform to certain
conditions. It must provide a mode of subsistence adequate to the
environment and the existing density of population; it must provide for
the continuance of the society by the proper care of children; it must
provide means for maintaining the cohesion of the society. All these
things involve the regulation of individual conduct in certain definite
ways; they involve, that is, a certain system of moral customs.

Each type of social organisation has its own system of moral customs,
and these could be explained by showing how they serve to maintain the
society in existence. Such an explanation would be of the
psychological, not of the historical type; it would give not the cause
of origin of any custom, but its social function. For example it is
easy to see the function of the very strong feelings of the Andamanese
as to the value of generosity in the distribution of food and of energy
in obtaining it, and as to the highly reprehensible nature of laziness
and greediness (meaning by the latter word, eating much when others
have little). It has only been by the cultivation of these virtues, or
by the eradication of the opposite vices, that the Andaman society has
maintained itself in existence in an environment where food is only
obtainable by individual effort, where it cannot be preserved from day
to day, and where there are occasional times of scarcity. It could be
shown, to take a further example, how the manner in which the life of
the family is organised is closely related to certain fundamental
social needs. If we were attempting an explanation of the Andamanese
culture as a whole and in all its details it would be necessary to
examine all the moral customs of the people and show their relations
one to another and to the fundamental basis on which the society is
organised.

The necessary regulation of conduct in a given society depends upon the
existence in each individual of an organised system of sentiments. That
system of sentiments or motives will clearly be different in different
cultures, just as the system of moral rules is different in societies
of different types. Yet there is, so to speak, a general substratum
that is the same in all human societies. No matter how the society may
be organised there must be in the individual a strong feeling of
attachment to his own group, to the social division (nation, village,
clan, tribe, caste, or what not) to which he belongs. The particular
way in which that sentiment is revealed in thought and action will
depend upon the nature of the group to which it refers. Similarly, no
society can exist without the presence in the minds of its members of
some form or other of the sentiment of moral obligation—the sentiment
that certain things must be done, certain other things must not be
done, because those are right, good, virtuous, these are wrong, bad,
vicious or sinful. Further, though perhaps less important, yet not less
necessary, there is the sentiment of dependence in its various
forms—dependence on others, on the society, on tradition or custom.

For a culture to exist, then, these sentiments (and others connected
with them, that need not be enumerated) must exist in the minds of
individuals in certain definite forms, capable of influencing action in
the direction required to maintain the cohesion of the society on its
actual basis of organisation. This, we may say, is the social function
of these sentiments.

Leaving aside altogether the question of how sentiments of these kinds
come into existence, we may note that they involve the existence of an
experience of a particular type. The individual experiences the action
upon himself of a power or force—constraining him to act in certain
ways not always pleasant, supporting him in his weakness, binding him
to his fellows, to his group. This force is clearly something not
himself—something outside of him therefore, and yet equally clearly it
makes itself felt not as mere external compulsion or support, but as
something within his own consciousness—within himself, therefore. If we
would give a name to this force we can only call it the moral force of
society. The very existence of a human society, the argument has run,
necessarily involves the existence of this actual experience of a moral
force, acting through the society upon the individual, and yet acting
within his own consciousness. The experience, then, is there, but it
does not follow that the primitive man can analyse his own experience;
it is obvious enough that such analysis is beyond him. Still the
experience does lead him to form certain notions or representations,
and it is possible to show how these notions are psychologically
related to the experience of a moral force.

The experience of this moral force comes to the individual in definite
concrete experiences only. We first learn to experience our own
dependence in our dealings with our parents, and thus we derive the
concrete form in which we clothe our later adult feeling of our
dependence upon our God. Or, to take an example from the vast number
provided by the customs of the Andamanese, the Andaman Islander, like
other savages, the main concern of whose lives is the getting and
eating of food, inevitably finds his experience of a moral force most
intimately associated with the things he uses for food. Inevitably,
therefore, he regards food as a substance in which, in some way, the
moral force is inherent, since it is often through food that the force
actually affects him and his actions. The psychology of the matter can
be traced, I hope, in the arguments of the last chapter. From the
analysis there given of different customs and beliefs it should be
obvious that the way in which the Andaman Islander regards all the
things that influence the social life is due to the way in which they
are associated with his experience of the moral force of the society.

In this way there arises in the mind of primitive man, as the result of
his social life and the play of feeling that it involves, the more or
less crude and undefined notion of a power in society and in nature
having certain attributes. It is this power that is responsible for all
conditions of social euphoria or dysphoria because in all such
conditions the power itself is actually experienced. It is the same
power that compels the individual to conform to custom in his conduct,
acting upon him both within as the force of conscience and without as
the force of opinion. It is the same force on which the individual
feels himself to be dependent, as a source of inner strength to him in
times of need. It is this force also that carries him away during
periods of social excitement such as dances, ceremonies or fights, and
which gives him the feeling of a sudden great addition to his own
personal force.

The Andamanese have not reached the point of recognizing by a special
name this power of which they are thus aware. I have shown that in some
of its manifestations they regard it, symbolically, as being a sort of
heat, or a force similar to that which they know in fire and heat. In
more developed societies, however, we find a nearer approach to a
definite recognition of this power or force in its different
manifestations by means of a single name. The power denoted by the word
mana in Melanesia, and by the words orenda, wakan, nauala, etc.,
amongst different tribes of North America, is this same power of which
I have tried to show that the notion arises from the actual experience
of the moral force of the society.

These sentiments and the representations connected with them, upon the
existence of which, as we have seen, the very existence of the society
depends, need to be kept alive, to be maintained at a given degree of
intensity. Apart from the necessity that exists of keeping them alive
in the mind of the individual, there is the necessity of impressing
them upon each new individual added to the society, upon each child as
he or she develops into an adult. Even individual sentiments do not
remain in existence in the mind unless they are exercised by being
expressed. Much more is this the case with collective sentiments, those
shared by a number of persons. The only possible way by which such
collective sentiments can be maintained is by giving them regular and
adequate expression.

Here then, according to the argument of the last chapter, we find the
function of the ceremonial customs of primitive peoples such as the
Andamanese. All these customs are simply means by which certain ways of
feeling about the different aspects of social life are regularly
expressed, and, through expression, kept alive and passed on from one
generation to another. Thus the customs connected with foods serve to
maintain in existence certain ways of feeling about foods and the moral
duties connected with them, and similarly with other customs.

Affective modes of experience (sentiments, feelings or emotions) can be
expressed not only in bodily movements but also by means of language. I
have tried to show that the function of the myths and legends of the
Andamanese is exactly parallel to that of the ritual and ceremonial.
They serve to express certain ways of thinking and feeling about the
society and its relation to the world of nature, and thereby to
maintain these ways of thought and feeling and pass them on to
succeeding generations. In the case of both ritual and myth the
sentiments expressed are those that are essential to the existence of
the society.

Throughout these two chapters I have avoided the use of the term
religion. My reason for this is that I have not been able to find a
definition of this term which would render it suitable for use in a
scientific discussion of the beliefs of such primitive peoples as the
Andamanese.

When we use the term religion we inevitably think first of what we
understand by that term in civilised society. It is not possible, I
believe, to give an exact definition which shall retain all the
connotations of the word as commonly used and which shall at the same
time help us in the study of the customs of undeveloped societies. The
definition of religion that seems to me on the whole most satisfactory
is that it consists of (1) a belief in a great moral force or power
(whether personal or not) existing in nature, and (2) an organised
relation between man and this Higher Power. If this definition be
accepted it is clear that the Andamanese have religious beliefs and
customs. They do believe in a moral power regulating the universe, and
they have organised their relations to that power by means of some of
their simple ceremonies. Yet it does not seem possible to draw a sharp
dividing line between those beliefs and customs that properly deserve
to be called religious, and others which do not deserve the adjective.
It is not possible, in the Andamans, to separate a definite entity
which we can call religion from things that may more appropriately be
regarded as art, morality, play, or social ceremonial.

Nevertheless the purpose of these two chapters has been to explain the
nature and function of the Andamanese religion. Amongst the fundamental
conditions that must be fulfilled if human beings are to live together
in society is the existence of this thing that we call religion, the
belief in a great Unseen Power, between which and ourselves it must
ever be the great concern of life to establish and maintain harmony.
The Andaman Islander with his somewhat childish faith, the Australian
black-fellow decorated with paint and feathers impersonating his
totemic ancestor, the Polynesian sacrificing human victims on the marae
of his god, the Buddhist following the Holy Eight-Staged Path, are all
following in however different ways the same eternal quest.








APPENDIX A

THE TECHNICAL CULTURE OF THE ANDAMAN ISLANDERS


In this appendix I shall give a brief account of the technical culture
of the Andaman Islanders, with a few comparative notes on the
technology of the Semang of the Malay Peninsula and the Negritos of the
Philippine Islands. The Andamanese, the Semang and the Philippine
Negritos are so similar in physical characteristics that it is
reasonable to suppose that they are descended from a single stock. It
is on the basis of this hypothesis that they are all spoken of as
belonging to one race, the Negrito race. It is therefore of some
interest to compare the culture of these three different peoples to see
if we can determine what was the culture of their ancestors.

In such hypothetical reconstructions of the past it is necessary to
proceed with extreme caution, as there is no means of controlling
results. The method I have adopted is to compare first of all the
different types of technological products or activities found in
different parts of the Andamans in order to determine as far as
possible what was the technical culture of the ancestors of the
Andamanese when they first reached the islands, and what changes have
taken place since the islands were occupied. It is only this primitive
or generalised Andamanese culture that can be compared with that of the
Semang or the Philippine Negritos.

From the point of view of technical culture the natives of the Andamans
must be separated into two main divisions, which will be spoken of as
the Great Andaman Division and the Little Andaman Division respectively
[226]. The most plausible explanation of the differences of culture and
language between these two divisions has been mentioned already. We
must assume that when the islands were first peopled, or at some later
time, the inhabitants of the Little Andaman became isolated from those
of the Great Andaman. The language and the technical culture of each of
the two groups underwent a number of changes during the many centuries
that followed. At a much later date, after the differences between the
two divisions had been developed, and probably not many centuries ago,
a party or several parties of natives must have made their way from the
Little Andaman as far as Rutland Island. Here they came in conflict
with the natives of the Great Andaman Division, and in this way arose
the antagonism between the Jarawa (the immigrants from the Little
Andaman) and the other natives of the South Andaman (who formed in 1858
the Aka-Bea tribe), which has lasted down to the present day. We shall
find that the technical culture of the Jarawa has been only very
slightly influenced by contact with the natives of the Great Andaman
Division, and therefore differs very little from that of the Little
Andaman at the present day.


                      Primitive Andaman Culture
                                    |
                      _____________/ \____________
                     /                      /     \
            ________/|\________            /       \
           /         |         \          /         \
     N. Sentinel   Little    Jarawa    Southern   Northern
                   Andaman              Group      Group
      \____________  ____________/       \_____  _____/
                   \/                          \/
        Little Andaman Division           Great Andaman
                                            Division


I have provisionally included the natives of the North Sentinel Island
in the Little Andaman Division. The ground for so doing is that the
form of bow in use in the North Sentinel Island is similar to that of
the Little Andaman and unlike that of the Great Andaman. Unfortunately,
almost nothing is known about the technology of the North Sentinel, and
nothing whatever about the language. It is possible that the natives of
this outlying islet have been isolated for many centuries from both the
Little Andaman and the Great Andaman, and further information about
them might show that their technology is different in important
respects from that of the Little Andaman.

Within the Great Andaman Division there are a number of differences in
technology between the tribes of the North Andaman and those of the
South Andaman and Middle Andaman.

In order to render the exposition and argument that follows more easily
understood the supposed relations of the different types of culture are
shown in the form of a diagram or tree. The justification for this
arrangement will appear as we proceed.

There is only very scanty information available about the technical
culture of the Negritos of the Malay Peninsula, whom we may speak of as
the Semang. There are differences of technology between the Semang of
different parts, and a careful study of these differences would serve
to throw much light on changes that have been introduced since the
Semang were isolated from the rest of their race. There is no doubt
that the Semang have adopted many elements of their present culture
from their neighbours the Sakai and others. In some instances it is
possible to trace this external influence, but in others it is doubtful
whether we are dealing with a primitive Semang form or with a form
adopted from their neighbours [227].

The same thing must be said about the Philippine Negritos. Our
information is not sufficient to enable us to discuss the local
differences, nor to determine what elements of the culture have been
introduced by contact with other races [228].



HABITATIONS.

The huts of the Andamanese are best understood by considering first of
all the simplest and most temporary structures. A man away from the
main camp at night (on a hunting expedition) erects for himself a
simple shelter of leaves. Such hunting shelters vary considerably
according to circumstances. In the rainy season they are built much
more substantially than in the dry season. Sometimes shelter is found
between the buttresses of large trees, a few leaves being added. There
is, however, one type of hunting shelter that is usual. Two poles are
cut and erected perpendicularly in the ground so that they stand about
four feet apart and about four feet high. To the top of these is tied,
with cane or creeper, a horizontal pole. A few poles or sticks of
sufficient length are placed so as to lean against the horizontal pole
at an angle of about 45°, the ends resting on the ground. On these are
placed any leaves that can be obtained, preferably the leaves of canes
and other palms. The shelter thus consists of a single rectangular
roof, one end of which rests on the ground, while the other rests on a
horizontal bar attached to the top of two perpendicular supports. The
shelter is built facing to leeward.

The usual family hut of the Andamans is built on exactly the same
principles as a hunter’s shelter, but, being intended for occupation
for some weeks or even months, is more carefully built. For a small
hut, to be occupied by one family, four posts are erected, two at the
back being from two to four feet high above the ground, while two at
the front are from five to seven feet high. Two horizontal poles are
attached, one to the top of the front posts and the other to the back
posts, with strips of cane. If poles of a convenient size and forked at
the top are available these may be used for the posts of the hut, the
horizontal poles being supported in the forks, but a native would not
trouble to search for such timbers, being satisfied with an unforked
post. A few slender timbers, preferably of mangrove wood (Bruguiera),
are placed on the two horizontal poles and bound to them with cane.
These rafters, as they may be called, project for a foot or two above
or beyond the higher horizontal, and similarly project a foot beyond
the lower one so as almost to reach the ground.

In the better kind of hut a mat is made of palm leaves, and this mat is
placed on the rafters and tied to them with strips of cane. To make a
mat a number of strips of bamboo or cane of sufficient length are taken
and placed on the ground parallel to each other. Leaves of a species of
cane are collected and each leaf is divided into two parts down the
middle. These half-leaves are then attached to the strips of bamboo or
cane, by means of strips of the outside of canes, the technique being
wrapped-twined work. The half-leaves are attached so that the leaflets,
which are attached to the leaf-stem at an angle, incline alternately to
one side and the other. The photograph reproduced in Plate VII shows a
hut of the kind here described. Mats in course of making are shown
lying on the ground in Plates VI and VII.

A quicker, but less efficient way of thatching the hut is to take the
half-leaves such as are used for making a mat and fasten them in
bundles of five or six directly to the rafters.

Huts of this type, each occupied by a single family, are built by the
natives of the Great Andaman Division in the form of villages. The
Jarawa and the natives of the Little Andaman build similar huts in
their hunting camps, occupied during the fine weather.

Some huts of this type are provided with a floor raised above the
ground. Such a floor is erected on short posts, and may be made of
bamboos or of planks or pieces of broken-up canoes. A floor of this
kind, raised a foot or so above the ground, is shown in Plate VII. Huts
are sometimes to be seen with a floor raised as much as three feet
above the ground.

The simple Andaman hut as above described is entirely open at the front
and on each side. In an exposed situation screens of palm-leaves may be
erected at the side. If still more shelter is required, a hut may be
built with two roofs. Such a hut requires six posts, two taller ones
six or seven feet high, and four shorter ones, two on each side. For
such a hut two mats are made, and are so attached that one mat projects
above the other. No attempt is made to fasten the two mats together at
the top, but on the contrary a space of several inches is left between
them to allow the smoke of the fire to escape, rain being excluded by
the overhang of one of the mats. Huts of this type may be seen in Plate
VI.

Each of the huts hitherto described is occupied by a single family. In
order to understand the communal huts it is necessary to consider the
arrangement of small huts in a camp or village. In the tribes of the
Great Andaman there are two main types of such arrangement. The first
type is that of the hunting camp, which is occupied for a few nights
only. In this all the huts are placed facing in the same direction (to
leeward) and in a line with one another. The second type is that of a
village to be occupied for some weeks or months. In this the huts are
arranged round an open space, all facing inwards, as described earlier
in this book [229]. All encampments in the Great Andaman tend to
conform to one or other of these types, but variations are introduced
according to the nature of the site occupied. Thus in a hunting camp
the site may not permit of the erection of the huts in one line. A
village is, as a rule, only put up at a spot that has been used from
time immemorial, where there is an open space of sufficient size, but
if, for any reason, a site is selected where there is not room to
arrange all the huts around the dancing ground, the arrangement of the
village may be irregular.

The hunting camps of the Jarawa are sometimes arranged on the same
principle as those of the tribes of the Great Andaman Division, i.e.,
all facing in one direction and as nearly in one line side by side as
the site will allow.

The natives of the Little Andaman erect hunting camps in the fine
weather. In the only one that I have seen the huts were arranged
irregularly so as to make the best use of the available space.

A few words must be said on the sites chosen for encampments. It must
be remembered that the islands are entirely covered with forest. The
natives will not, if they can avoid it, put their camp under high
trees, for fear of the danger of falling branches in a storm. At the
same time they prefer a situation where there is an open space
surrounded with forest so that they are sheltered from the wind. The
coast-dwellers always camp immediately within the jungle on the shore
of the sea or of a creek. The forest-dwellers usually choose a position
on a hill or ridge, and this is particularly the case with the Jarawa.
The camp must be close to a supply of fresh water. In the tribes of the
Great Andaman Division no precautions are taken against a possible
attack by enemies, but the Jarawa do take precautions, clearing the
trees around their camps so that they have a good view of the
approaches, and even, apparently, placing look-out stations at the tops
of the paths [230].

Amongst the coast-dwelling tribes there are sites that have been used
for encampments for many centuries. At these spots there are found
heaps of refuse that have accumulated year by year. These
kitchen-middens, as they are sometimes called, consist of the shells of
molluscs, bones of animals, stones that have been used for cooking,
fragments of pottery, and loam produced from decayed wood and other
refuse.

The two types of camp arrangement which are seen in the village and the
hunting camp are exhibited in two different types of communal hut. One
of these, corresponding to the hunting camp, may be termed the long
shelter. It is apparently only used in the North Sentinel Island. A hut
of this type was seen by Mr Gilbert Rogers in 1903. It was rectangular,
40 feet long and 12 feet wide. The roof was supported on three rows of
small posts ranging in height from 3 feet at the back to 6 feet at the
front of the hut. The roof projected about 2 feet in either direction
beyond the posts and was about 2 feet from the ground at the back and 7
feet above the ground at the front. There were twelve places for fires,
six in front and six at the back of the hut, and near each, on the
right-hand side, was a platform supported on four sticks, of the usual
Andamanese type, for keeping food. There were two rows of sleeping
places which were separated by small poles, making rectangles on the
ground about 5 feet by 4 feet, each of which was probably occupied by a
man and his wife and small children [231].

The relation of this type of communal hut, in which all the members of
one local group are brought together under a single roof of one slope,
to the ordinary family hut of the Andamans, and the arrangement of the
hunting camp in a line, is obvious.

To the arrangement of huts in a village around a central open space
corresponds the second type of communal hut, which may be called the
round hut. Communal huts of this type were formerly built by the
natives of the Great Andaman Division, but have fallen into disuse in
recent times, owing to the natives having become much more migratory in
their habits. Huts of the same type are built at the present day by the
natives of the Little Andaman and by the Jarawa.

In its typical form this kind of hut is built by erecting two circles
of posts, a smaller circle of tall posts, and a wider circle of shorter
posts. The tops of these posts are connected by horizontal and sloping
timbers, which make the framework of the roof. The roof is made of a
number of mats of palm-leaves, which are laid on the rafters and tied
to them with strips of cane. The mats are made in exactly the same way
as the smaller mats used for the small huts and already described. They
are sometimes rectangular in shape, though occasionally an attempt is
made to make them narrower at the top and broader at the bottom. They
are arranged on the roof so as to overlap one another and thus make the
hut rain-proof. They are not joined in the centre, but a small space is
left for the smoke of the fires to escape, and the rain is prevented
from entering by letting one or two of the mats overhang the others at
the top.

In the round huts of the Jarawa and the Little Andaman there is no
centre-post, and according to the statements made to me by the natives
of the Great Andaman they did not use a centre-post for their huts. In
the description attached to a photograph in the British Museum Mr
Portman speaks of the centre-post of a communal hut, which is shown in
the photograph still standing, although the hut had been pulled down.
It would therefore seem that in the Great Andaman the natives did
sometimes erect a centre-post for their round huts. The typical round
hut, however, has no centre-post.

It is clear that the round hut has been developed from the village. If
all the small huts of a village be drawn together so as to touch each
other, and if the mats of thatching be lengthened so as to meet and
overlap in the middle, we have a round hut in its typical form. The
evidence that this is so is afforded by the thatching, consisting of
separate mats, often rectangular in shape (like the mats used for
family huts), placed so as to overlap one another. This crude way of
thatching could hardly have originated in any other way. Further
evidence is afforded, as we shall see, by the internal arrangement of
the hut.

Although the hut is here called a round hut, it must not be supposed
that the shape is always regularly circular. It may be somewhat oval,
and in any case is rarely very regularly constructed. In general,
however, the shape approaches more or less nearly to a circle.

Huts of this kind vary in size according to the number of families
occupying them. The height in the middle may be as much as 30 feet and
the diameter may be 60 feet. The smallest I have seen was a Jarawa hut
on Rutland Island, which was only nine feet high and 15 feet maximum
diameter. In exposed situations the mats of thatching reach as far as
the ground, but huts are sometimes built in sheltered situations with a
space of a foot or two left between the ends of the thatch and the
ground. A low doorway is provided on one side.

Within the hut there is a central space that is the common part of the
hut and corresponds to the dancing ground of the village. In the wet
season the communal fire is situated in this open space, and here the
communal cooking is performed. In Jarawa huts the roof of the central
part of the hut is hung with trophies of the chase consisting of pigs’
skulls bound with cane. In former times the natives of the Great
Andaman Division hung similar trophies in their round huts. Around the
central space are the spaces allotted to the different families, these
being marked off by means of short lengths of wood laid on the ground.

It is thus clear that the basis of Andamanese architecture is the use
of a single rectangular roof giving a shelter open at the front. This
is the usual form of the hunter’s shelter and of the family hut in the
village. For additional shelter two such roofs may be used, but no
attempt is made to join them, one being made to overlap the other.
There are two customary modes of arranging huts, either side by side
facing in the same direction or round an open space facing inwards.
Where, instead of separate roofs for each family, we have a united
roof, these two arrangements of the camp give rise to two different
types of communal hut, the long hut and the round hut.

In a village each hut is occupied by one family. In the communal hut
(of either type) each family has a special portion of the hut marked
off for its special use. Whether in a village or in a communal hut each
family has its own small fire, at which the family meals are prepared.
At one side of this fire is erected a small platform about a foot above
the ground, supported on either three or four upright sticks. This
platform is used for storing food. The natives of the Little Andaman
erect low bamboo platforms to serve as beds, arranged round the
communal hut, each family having its own. In the Great Andaman the
natives, as a rule, make a bed of leaves on the ground and lay a
sleeping mat on the top of this. In damp situations, however, they
sometimes, as already mentioned, make a floor to the hut, raised a foot
or two above the ground, and sleep on that. The Jarawa have a habit of
sleeping in the wood-ashes of their fires in their cold weather hunting
camps.

Turning now to the Semang, we find some differences in respect to their
habitations. Those of the Semang who have not been influenced to a
great extent by their neighbours and have not settled down to
agricultural pursuits, never camp in the same spot for more than a few
days, and have therefore no need to build anything except temporary
shelters [232].

The Semang often erect their shelters in trees, well above the surface
of the ground. This is a feature which distinguishes them from the
Andamanese. It seems probable that these tree-shelters have been
adopted by the Semang as a protection against wild beasts [233]. As
there are no dangerous beasts in the Andamans, the extra labour
involved in building a shelter in the branches of a tree instead of on
the ground would serve no useful purpose. The difference in this
respect between the Semang and the Andamanese is therefore due to a
difference in the circumstances in which they live.

The typical form of Semang shelter, occupied by one family, is erected
by planting three or four stout sticks or poles in the ground in a row
at an angle of about 60° or 75° and lashing palm-leaves across these.
The screen or roof thus formed is further supported, if necessary, with
one or two poles used as props in front [234]. These shelters are
similar to the Andaman shelters in having a single sloping rectangular
roof, but differ from them in being supported, not by upright posts,
but in an altogether less adequate manner. However, the Semang shelters
are apparently very easy to erect, and as they are only occupied for a
night or two there is no inducement to the natives to make them more
substantial.

The Semang sometimes make a shelter by planting a number of palm-leaves
in the ground in a semicircle so that the overhanging ends meet in the
centre [235].

As the Semang are constantly moving from place to place, they have
little use for a communal hut of substantial build. One communal
shelter has been described, which contained eleven sleeping-places
arranged in two long rows. The upright timbers of the shelter consisted
of young saplings planted in two opposite rows, across them being
lashed the leaves of a palm. There were, besides, two central posts or
pillars, each about a third of the distance from either end of the
shelter, and a dozen poles placed as props or wind-braces in various
positions and at various angles, in order to strengthen the structure
and keep it from being blown over in a high wind. The two slopes of the
roof were not united over a ridge-pole, but a longitudinal aperture was
left between them for about two-thirds of the entire length of the
roof, and through the gap thus caused the greater part of the smoke
from the many fireplaces issued. All round the walls were ranged a
number of bamboo sleeping-platforms, five to six feet in length by
about three feet in breadth. The owner of each sleeping-platform or
family unit possessed a separate fire or hearth [236].

We have only scanty information about the huts of the Philippine
Negritos. In Zambales (Luzon) a certain number of the Negritos have
adopted a settled mode of life and depend on agriculture for some part
of their subsistence. The most advanced of these have adopted the form
of hut common amongst their neighbours. The less settled Negritos of
Zambales erect huts which are almost exactly the same as the family
huts of the Andamanese. Two short upright posts are erected for the
back of the hut, and two taller ones for the front, and on these four
posts a rectangular roof of one slope is erected. A bamboo floor or
platform is erected a foot or so above the ground, just as in some
Andaman huts [237]. In the Zambales huts the upright posts are forked
and the horizontal poles are supported in the fork.

At Casiguran the Negritos erect palm-leaf shelters similar to those of
the Semang. A few poles are thrust into the ground at an angle and in a
row and palm-leaves are attached to these, the screen being further
supported with props [238].

A comparison of the three branches of the Negrito race in the light of
present information shows that the usual form of habitation amongst
them is a sloping roof or screen of palm-leaves. One form of this, the
simplest to construct, but only suitable as a temporary shelter, is in
common use amongst the Semang and is found amongst the Negritos of
Casiguran. The other form, more permanent but requiring more labour to
erect, is in common use in the Andamans and amongst the Negritos of
Zambales. Of communal huts we have no evidence in the Philippines. The
communal shelter of the Semang consists of two screens leaning towards
one another. The two types of communal hut of the Andamans are both
derived from the family hut.



HUNTING, FISHING, ETC.

The Andaman Islanders depend for their subsistence entirely upon the
natural productions of the forest and the sea. They make no attempt
whatever to cultivate the soil. Until the introduction of dogs in 1858
they had no domestic animals. Young pigs are occasionally kept in
captivity till they are grown, but they are killed for food and are not
bred in captivity. Thus the Andamanese provide themselves with food by
three different forms of activity: (1) collecting such things as roots
and fruits and honey, (2) fishing in the sea and in the creeks, (3)
hunting the wild animals of the forest.

For hunting the Andamanese rely entirely on the bow and arrow. Since
they have had dogs they occasionally make hunting spears, but they did
not do so in former times. They make no use whatever of any method of
trapping game or birds. For fishing they also make use of the bow and
arrow, wading out on to the reefs and shooting the fish, and in this
they are very skilful. Crustaceans, such as crabs and crayfish, are
captured in the same way. In the North Andaman a sort of short fish
spear was formerly in use as an occasional substitute for the bow and
arrow. In all parts of the islands small nets are used by the women for
catching small fish and prawns. In the Great Andaman large nets were
formerly used for capturing turtle, dugong and large fish near the
shore. At the present time the natives of the Great Andaman Division
make use of harpoons with which they capture turtle, dugong and large
fish from their canoes. Harpoons are not used in the Little Andaman.
The Andamanese are also aware of methods of poisoning or stupefying
fish in pools by means of certain plants that they crush and place in
the water, but I have never seen them use this method of fishing,
although they say that they formerly did so. They have no fish hooks
and no fish traps. At the present time a few of the natives have learnt
to take fish with hook and line, but they are unable to make hooks for
themselves, and have to obtain them from the Settlement at Port Blair.

In collecting roots a digging stick is used, and a hooked pole is used
for gathering fruit, but they have no other special implements in use
in collecting natural productions, and have no need of any. The adze is
used for obtaining molluscs and for cutting honey-combs from hollow
trees.

It is thus clear that by far the most important utensil of the
Andamanese is the bow and arrow. We may say that they are essentially a
bow and arrow people. This is even more true of the natives of the
Little Andaman Division than of those of the Great Andaman Division.

It may be noted here that the Andamanese have no weapons that are used
only for fighting. They fight with their chief hunting weapon, the bow
and arrow. Nor have they any special defensive weapons, the shield
being unknown.

The Semang in their natural condition depend for their subsistence on
collecting roots and fruits from the forest, on catching fish in the
streams, and on hunting animals. Their mode of subsistence is thus
essentially the same as that of the Andamanese. One difference is that
they have not the sea from which to draw supplies, and another is that
the forests in which they live afford a much larger variety of game. A
number of the Semang now practice a little rude agriculture which they
have undoubtedly adopted in imitation of their neighbours of other
races [239].

The principal weapon of the Semang, as of the Andamanese, is the bow
and arrow. In hunting they also use spears [240], thus showing a
difference from the Andamanese. Some of the Semang make use of the
blow-pipe with poisoned darts, but it is practically certain that they
have adopted the use of this weapon from their neighbours the Sakai
[241]. They also make use to some extent of traps with which to capture
jungle animals and birds. The wilder Semang living in the mountains
have little opportunity of obtaining fish. Those of them that dwell
near rivers use fish-spears and harpoons for catching large fish, and a
small basket-work scoop for catching small fry [242]. They also fish
with rod and line, the hooks being, as a rule, roughly manufactured
from bits of brass or other wire [243]. The Semang have no special
fighting weapons either offensive or defensive.

In the Philippines some of the Negritos practice a little rude
agriculture [244]. It is practically certain that they have only
adopted this mode of subsistence through contact with agricultural
peoples of other races. They originally depended entirely upon
collecting, fishing and hunting, and even those who now grow a few
scanty crops devote a large part of their energies to hunting and
collecting the natural products of the jungles [245]. The chief weapon
of the Negritos of the Philippines, as of the Andamanese and the
Semang, is the bow and arrow. They use the bow and arrow for shooting
fish, having special fish-arrows [246]. It seems doubtful if they use
spears, unless they have adopted them from their neighbours. In hunting
deer the Negritos of Zambales use large nets like fish nets. They are
acquainted with the use of traps for game but they seem to prefer to
depend on the bow and arrow [247]. In the larger streams of Zambales
they make fishing weirs of bamboo, after the manner of the
Christianised natives of the same part [248].

As the most important weapon of the Andamanese, and indeed of the
Negritos in general, is the bow, we may consider this first. Different
kinds of bow are in use in different parts of the Andamans, but by a
careful comparison of them it is possible to show how they are all
derived from one original pattern.

The first kind of bow to be described is that in use in the Little
Andaman. These bows are all made of a reddish-brown wood (possibly
Mimusops littoralis). They are cut with an adze from a straight piece
of wood, and are planed but not polished. The length varies within
fairly wide limits. Six specimens selected as typical have lengths of
131, 150, 159·5, 163, 168 and 188 centimetres, giving an average of
about 160 centimetres (= 63 inches). In section the bow is markedly
convex on the one side and slightly convex on the other. The two
figures (Fig. 1) show the section at the middle and at a point 7 cm.
from the end of a typical specimen. The shape in section varies a
little from one example to another, and the dimensions of breadth and
thickness also vary. At the broadest point, which is in the middle, the
average breadth of six bows is 3·2 cm., the broadest being 3·7 cm., and
the narrowest 2·3 cm. The average thickness in the middle is 1·8 cm.,
the actual figures ranging from 2·1 to 1·3 cm. From the middle the bow
tapers slightly towards each end. At a distance of 7 cm. from the end
of the bow the average breadth is 1·8 cm., and the average thickness
1·2 cm.

The flatter side is the inside of the bow. Referring to the figures,
the side marked A is that which faces a man as he holds the bow ready
to shoot (called here the inside). C is thus the right-hand side and D
the left-hand. By breadth is meant the distance from C to D, and by
thickness the distance from A to B.

At each end of the bow there is a shoulder, as shown in Fig. 2. The
length from the shoulder to the end of the bow, i.e. the length of the
point on which the string is looped, is about 10 to 12 mm. Both ends
are the same. For a few centimetres below the shoulder the bow is
served over with string or fibre. In a carefully finished bow the
serving is usually done with ornamental string, i.e. with string round
which is twisted the dried yellow skin of the Dendrobium. In other
examples plain string is used, or a strip of twisted Ficus fibre, or
even nowadays a twisted strip of cotton cloth.

Bows are never ornamented in the Little Andaman either with paint or
with incised patterns.

The bow-string of the Little Andaman is made of strips of the bark of
the Ficus laccifera. The number and width of the strips used depend on
the size of the bow. In a small bow now in the Cambridge Museum the
string is made of a single strip of bark about 1 cm. in width. This
strip is simply twisted, the twist being that of a right-hand or male
screw. When two strips are used they are not twisted around one another
in the way that a two-ply rope is made, but are laid flat together and
twisted together, so that when the string is finished only one of the
strips is visible, the other being inside. In a stout string for a
large bow three or four strips may be twisted together in this way. The
bow-string is not a rope, but a twisted strand (Fig. 3.)

At one end of the string a loop is made, as shown in Fig. 4. The end is
doubled over to make a loop of the right size, a round turn is made
over the standing part (A) and the end (B) is twisted in with the
standing part by untwisting the latter, laying the end in, and twisting
up again. If this splicing, as it may perhaps be loosely called, be not
sufficiently secure, it is served over or stopped with finer fibre of
the same kind. This loop is of sufficient size to slip down over the
shoulders. At the other end the string is attached to the peg either
with a knot, or else by means of a small loop (just large enough to go
over the peg, but not large enough to slip over the shoulder) made in
exactly the same way as the loop already described. When the bow is to
be strung the larger loop is slipped over the peg at the top end of the
bow and is pushed down over the shoulder. The other end (with the
smaller loop) is then slipped on the peg at the lower end, resting on
the shoulder. The lower end is placed on the ground, while the top end
is held in the hand. The man places his foot against the middle of the
bow and draws the top towards him until he is able to slip the top loop
of the string up over the shoulder so that it catches the peg or tip.
The bow is then ready for use.

Toy bows are made for small boys of exactly the same general pattern as
the large bows. A toy bow of this kind, now in the Cambridge Museum, is
107 cm. long and 18 mm. broad in the middle.

The next type of bow to be considered is that used by the natives of
the North Sentinel Island. I have only been able to see one specimen of
this type, which is in the British Museum. It is made of a different
kind of wood from that used in the Little Andaman. The length is 155·5
cm., and the breadth at the middle is 4·3 cm. The section in the
middle, which is shown in Fig. 5, is slightly different from that of
the average Little Andaman bow, but it has the same feature of greater
convexity on the outside and less convexity on the inside, and it lies
just within the range of variation of the Little Andaman type. The ends
of the bow are shaped in the same way as those of the Little Andaman
bow. The breadth at the shoulder, however, is 2·5 cm., which is greater
than the corresponding measurement of the Little Andaman bow. The bow
is not ornamented either with a painted or incised pattern. The string
is missing. There is no binding at the ends below the shoulders, but
this has possibly been present and come off, as the specimen is one
that has been thrown away by its owner owing to the wood having split.
So far as we can tell from this single specimen the bow of the North
Sentinel differs very little from that of the Little Andaman.

We now come to the bows of the Jarawa of the South Andaman. The Jarawa
of Rutland Island, of whom there are now very few, but of whom there
were a larger number twenty or thirty years ago, make bows exactly like
those of the Little Andaman, and apparently do not make any other kind.
The Jarawa to the north of Port Blair, who have been driven northwards
by the spread of the Penal Settlement, also make bows of this type,
which it is not possible to distinguish from Little Andaman bows. These
northern Jarawa, however, also make bows of a different kind. These
will be spoken of as belonging to the “modified Jarawa type.” They are
larger than Little Andaman bows, having an average length of about 185
cm., with a breadth of about 5 cm. The section, throughout the greater
part of the length, is either plano-convex, or, more frequently,
concavo-convex. The section of a typical example is shown in Fig. 6. At
the middle of the bow, where it is held in the hand, there is a slight
thickening produced by a protuberance on the inside, i.e. on the flat
or concave side. In a certain number of specimens the bow, instead of
being straight, is slightly recurved outwards. Finally, the wood from
which these bows are cut is not the same as that used in the Little
Andaman.

The Little Andaman bow, the North Sentinel bow and the Jarawa bow are
all varieties of one type. The Little Andaman form is probably nearest
to the original of the type, and I shall show later how the
modifications found in the modified Jarawa type came to be adopted.

We now come to bows of a different type, of which there are two
varieties, one used in the South and Middle Andaman, and the other used
in the North Andaman.

The bow of the South Andaman tribes is not cut from a straight piece of
wood, but is cut from a tree that has bent in the course of its growth
into a suitable curve. A tree has to be found that will provide a piece
of wood of the required shape. From this the bow is shaped with an
adze, and is finished by planing with a boar’s tusk.

Bows of this kind vary in length between 180 and 210 cm., the most
usual length being between 190 and 195 cm. At the upper end the bow is
brought to a point approximately circular in section. From this point
it broadens out until, at a distance of about 50 or 55 cm., or between
one-quarter and one-third of the length of the bow, it reaches its
maximum breadth, which is, on the average, about 5·5 cm. The section of
the bow at this point is convex on the outer side, while on the inner
side it may be flat or slightly concave, or even in rare instances
slightly convex. In many specimens there is a very slightly raised keel
running down the middle of the inside of the bow. The thickness of the
bow at the point mentioned is usually 1·5 to 1·75 cm., and there is
little variation in this respect in different specimens. (See Fig. 8.)

At the middle the bow decreases in breadth and increases in thickness
to form a handle. At the handle the usual section may be described as
pear-shaped, the greatest diameter being the thickness (from inside to
outside) and not the breadth.

From the handle towards the lower end the bow again increases in
breadth, so that the lower portion is about the same breadth and
thickness as the upper portion. At the lower end it tapers to a point,
circular in section, but the point is blunter than at the upper end.

Thus the whole bow consists of a leaf-shaped upper portion or blade
which is straight (i.e. neither curved inwards nor outwards), a waist
or handle, and a lower blade that is curved backwards or outwards at
about its middle, this being the position of the bend in the wood from
which it is cut. A bow of this type is shown in Plate V.

Near each end the bow is served over with string for a distance of 3 or
4 cm., leaving a bare point at the upper end of about 7 cm. long, and a
point at the lower end of about 1·5 cm. (Fig. 7.)

A bow-string is made from the fibre of the Anadendron. A number of
strands of the fibre are taken and are waxed with black bees’-wax. Four
of these strands are taken, three of them are placed together and the
fourth is wound spirally round them. When the end of the active strand
(the one being twisted round the others) is neared, a new strand is
taken and laid in. The twisting is continued for a few turns and the
newly inserted one is then taken, the end of the first active strand
being laid in and wound over in its turn. The process continues in this
way, new strands being added until a cord of sufficient length has been
made. This is again waxed over on the outside.

At one end of the cord a knot is tied. At the other end a loop or eye
is formed. To make this eye, when the cord is of sufficient length, the
end of it is bent over to form a loop of about 1 cm. or a little more
in diameter. This loop is then served over with thread made of
Anadendron fibre. The serving is continued over the neck of the loop
for about 1·5 cm. This gives an eye with the appearance shown in Fig.
9. A loose strand of fibre is left at the neck of the loop. This is
wound spirally over the cord, as described before, new strands being
added one after another until the cord has been treated in this way for
about 35 cm. from the eye. It is then stopped by serving it over for
about 2 cm. with Anadendron thread. It is clear from this description
that the cord is somewhat thicker for about 35 cm. from the end with
the eye than it is in the rest of its length.

To string the bow the knotted end of the bow-string is fastened round
the top end of the bow with a slip knot, so that it rests on the top of
the string serving. The bow is then turned upside down and the top end
(now temporarily at the bottom) is fixed in the ground or against a
stone, so that it will not slip. The other end of the bow is taken by
the left hand, while the cord is held in the right, the right foot is
placed against the handle or middle of the bow and the bow is bent, the
end held by the hand being drawn towards the operator until he is able
to slip over it the eye or loop at the end of the string.

After the bow has been strung the upper portion, which before was
straight, is now curved inwards, and the bow therefore appears as
S-shaped when seen from the side. When a man starts out hunting or
fishing he strings his bow and tests it, and it remains strung till he
returns, when he unstrings it and places it in his hut.

The advantage of having a knot at one end of the string seems to be
that should the string be stretched by use it can be tightened by
altering the position of the knot.

At the point where the nock of the arrow is placed when the bow is
drawn, it is usual to serve the string over with thread of Anadendron
fibre.

The peculiar features of the South Andaman bow depend on the fact that
the bow takes advantage of the greater toughness and elasticity of wood
that has been compressed in the course of its growth. When the bow is
drawn the strain does not fall evenly, but, by reason of the shape of
the bow, is concentrated on one portion, namely the lower portion of
the bow where it is curved outwards. This is easily seen when a bow is
strongly drawn, for from the S-shape that it has before, it becomes
very nearly true arc-shaped when fully drawn. The lower portion of the
bow works as though hinged, and thus the strain is largely borne by the
curved portion of the bow. Now this portion is cut from the concave
side of a tree that has been bent while growing, and consequently the
fibres of the wood are here stronger, tougher and more elastic. The
result is that for a given amount of energy spent in drawing the bow a
greater force of propulsion is given to the arrow than with a bow of
the Little Andaman type.

The breadth of the bow is necessitated by its shape, for if it were
narrow the string would slip round on to the outside of the bow. The
narrowing at the handle is necessary for holding the bow. The adoption
of tapered ends instead of shoulders is a definite improvement as it
makes the bow less liable to split at the ends.

The bows of the South Andaman group of tribes are always decorated with
incised patterns. The conventional pattern is shown in Fig. 10. One
line of such pattern runs down each edge of both the inside and the
outside of the bow, and on the inside a similar line of pattern runs
down the middle. When bows are newly made they are often also decorated
with designs in red paint and white clay, particularly if they are
intended as gifts. These painted designs soon wear off and are not
renewed.

In these tribes bows are sometimes made of a size so large as to be
almost useless for hunting. One such bow, now in the Cambridge Museum,
is 220 cm. long and with a maximum breadth of 10 cm. Such bows are very
carefully made and decorated and are intended as gifts. A man generally
makes such a bow with the deliberate intention of giving it to some
person whom he wishes to please. The bow that I have was specially made
to give to me in this way. A man who possessed such a bow would not
dream of using it in hunting, but he might use it in a shooting match,
in order to show his skill.

In the South Andaman tribes toy bows are made for boys of somewhat the
same shape as the ordinary hunting bow. An example of such a bow, now
in the Cambridge Museum, is 121 cm. long. It is cut from a bent piece
of wood in such a way that the lower portion is curved outwards. The
section in the middle is plano-convex, very nearly the half of a
circle, the breadth being 26 mm. and the thickness 13 mm. It is
broadest in the middle, and tapers towards each end. When strung it
assumes the typical S-shape of the South Andaman bow. It is served over
with thread at one end and with a strip of cotton cloth at the other,
leaving two points for the string. The latter is of the usual South
Andaman type, but of smaller dimensions.

We must turn now to the bow used by the four tribes of the North
Andaman, which is of a somewhat different pattern from that just
described. It is, in the first place, shorter, lighter and more
slenderly made. Of ten typical specimens the shortest is 153 cm. long,
and the longest is 182 cm. The usual length is about 160 to 165 cm. In
its broadest part the North Andaman bow is broader than the South
Andaman bow, the breadth varying from 6·5 to 7·5 cm. in different
specimens.

Although the North Andaman bow is, as a rule, cut from a curved piece
of wood, it may, on occasion, be cut from a piece that is practically
straight.

At the upper end of the bow there is a long point. In a specimen that
is in every way typical, at about 5 cm. from the point the section is
circular and the diameter is about 5 mm.; at about 30 cm. from the end
the section is slightly flattened or oval, and the maximum diameter
(the breadth from side to side) is about 1·5 cm. From this the bow
broadens fairly rapidly, until at a distance of about 60 cm. from the
end it is 7 cm. broad. The section at a point 60 cm. from the end is
shown in Fig. 11, where it may be seen to be convex on the outside and
only very slightly convex on the inside. At about 75 cm. from the end
the bow narrows in breadth to form a handle, at the same time
increasing slightly in thickness. The handle is approximately circular
in section in the middle, which is about 95 cm. from the upper end, and
about 80 cm. from the lower end, the diameter being about 2·2 cm. Below
the handle the bow broadens out once more into a lower blade which in
shape and section is similar to the upper blade. At a distance of about
30 cm. from the lower end the bow once more narrows off to a point
approximately circular in section. The lower point of the bow is not so
long or so tapering as the upper point.

The whole bow thus consists of two blade-shaped portions tapering to a
point at each end, and with a waist or handle between them. The upper
blade is straight, i.e. is not curved either outwards or inwards. The
lower blade is curved outwards (like that of the South Andaman bow) in
nearly every newly made bow and in every bow that has been in use.

The upper part of the bow is served over with string for about 1·5 cm.
(at a distance of 15·5 cm. from the end in the bow that has been
described), and the lower end is similarly served (at a distance of 6
cm. from the end). The general shape of the bow as seen from inside is
shown in Fig. 12.

The bow-string of the North Andaman is made from Anadendron fibre in
much the same way as described in connection with the South Andaman
bow, but in the North there is a loop or eye at both ends of the
string. As soon as the first few centimetres of the cord have been made
(by the method previously described) it is bent over into a loop, and
this loop is served with Anadendron thread, just as in the case of the
South Andaman string. The making of the string then proceeds in the
usual way until a sufficient length has been made, this depending, of
course, on the length of the bow for which it is intended. The end is
then bent over into a loop, and this loop is served over with thread.
The loose end of fibre is not in this case (as it is in the South
Andaman string) twisted round the standing part of the cord, but is
laid beside it, and the thread that has been used for serving is wound
spirally round them both for a distance of about 10 cm. from the neck
of the loop, so that the end is stopped.

When the bow is to be strung the first made loop is slipped over the
top end of the bow so that it rests on the thread serving already
mentioned, the neck of the loop being on the inside of the bow. The bow
is then laid on the ground, inside downwards, a foot is placed on the
middle, and the lower end of the bow is bent upwards (and therefore
outwards) far enough to allow the other loop of the cord to be slipped
over the end. The bow is now in what may be called the half-strung
position, and in order to understand the mechanical principles of this
type of bow it is necessary to make quite clear what this position is.
It is shown in Fig. 13, A. The string passes from the top to the bottom
on the outside of the bow, so that the bow is, so to speak, reversed,
and is subjected to a strain that causes it to curve outwards. In most
bows, when they are first made, there is an outward curve in the lower
portion, owing to the bow having been cut from a curved piece of wood.
When the bow is half strung this outward curvature is increased. If a
bow be made from a straight piece of wood, an outward curve is produced
by the operation of stringing it, as described above.

As soon as a bow is completed it is strung in the reversed position
described, and is then placed over a fire, in such a position that the
lower (curved) blade is immediately above the fire. The smoke and heat
of the fire season the wood of this portion of the bow. Any specimen of
a bow of this type, unless it has been newly made and not seasoned, is
blackened on the inner surface of its lower part. The bow is left to
season in this way for some time. A man places his bow over the fire of
his own hut, which is kept constantly burning day and night. It must be
remembered that all the time it is being seasoned the bow is subjected
to a slight strain curving it outwards.

After the bow has been sufficiently seasoned it is brought into use.
When a bow that is half strung or strung in a reversed way is to be
used, it is taken by the handle in the left hand, with the string away
from the body, the bow being upside down. The lower part of the bow
(i.e. what is really the top of the bow when it is in its normal
position) is rested against the thigh. The string is taken in the right
hand and pulled over towards the body, so that the bow reverses itself
and appears in the fully strung position shown in Fig. 13, B. It is
then ready for immediate use.

A bow of this type is hardly ever entirely unstrung. When a man has
finished with his bow for the time being, he puts it once more in the
half-strung position, by an action the reverse of that described above,
and then hangs the bow over the fire. Thus while the bow is in active
use it is in the fully strung position, and at all other times it is
kept in the half-strung position.

It is clear that the North Andaman bow depends on a principle that is
not made use of in the South Andaman bow, which we may state by saying
that if a piece of wood be subjected to the influence of heat and smoke
while it is bent in one position it will acquire greater strength and
elasticity to react against a strain that bends it in the opposite
direction. When the bow is fully strung it is S-shaped. When it is
drawn the greater part of the strain falls on the lower portion where
it is curved outwards. It is this portion of the bow that is
strengthened by seasoning.

The North Andaman bow is very much lighter than the South Andaman bow
and is much more elastic. I always found it very difficult to shoot
with a South Andaman bow, but on the other hand I found the North
Andaman bow very easy to use. In drawing it only a slight pull is
required in order to send an arrow with considerable velocity. The
disadvantage of the northern bow is that, owing to its slighter build,
it does not last very long, and is liable to be broken. However, it
only takes a man a few days to make a new bow, string included, and the
very definite superiority of the North Andaman bow over that of the
South Andaman amply compensates for its shorter life.

Bows of exactly the same shape but of smaller dimensions are made in
the North Andaman for boys, the length varying from about 90 cm. to
about 120 cm. For very small boys toy bows of a different pattern are
made. The bow is formed of a piece of wood about 90 cm. long and from 2
to 2·5 cm. broad in the middle. The section in the middle is
convexo-convex, with a high degree of convexity on the outside and a
much slighter convexity on the inside. The bow tapers to a point at
each end, but it tapers more gradually at the top than at the bottom.
The bow-string is a simple piece of string (two-ply) made of Anadendron
fibre. It is tied to the lower end of the bow at a distance of 1·5 to 3
cm. from the end, and at the top it is tied at from 4 to 7 cm. from the
end. The shape of a toy bow of this kind as seen from the side is shown
in Fig. 14. It is not S-shaped, like the toy bow of the South Andaman
previously described, but the curvature is asymmetrical.

I obtained a specimen of a toy bow made of bamboo. Unfortunately there
was no string, but it was probably intended to be strung in the fashion
of the North Andaman toy bow just described. The outer surface of the
bamboo was the outside of the bow, with the result that in section the
inner side of the bow was more convex than the outer side. This is the
only bow in the whole of the Andamans in which I ever saw this feature.
In all other bows of whatever type the outer side is markedly convex
and the inner side is either concave, flat or only slightly convex.

It is now possible to compare one with another the different forms of
bow in use in the Andamans. It would seem almost certain that the North
Andaman bow can only have been derived from the form in use in the
South Andaman or from one very similar to it. It is only after they
were in the habit of making bows with an outward curve in the lower
portion that the natives could have devised the method of seasoning
this portion of the bow and keeping it in the reversed or half-strung
position. It is unnecessary to argue the matter in detail, and we may
conclude that the North Andaman type is derived from the South Andaman
type.

It is less certain, but still highly probable, that the South Andaman
form was derived from a bow similar to that still in use in the Little
Andaman. The South Andaman toy bow shows a stage intermediate between
the Little Andaman bow and the usual South Andaman form. The section of
this toy bow is very similar to that of the Little Andaman bow. It has
no blades, and therefore no waist for the handle. The shape, however,
is asymmetrical. Owing to the different method of stringing it, the
shoulder at the end of the bow is unnecessary, and the bow is
strengthened (prevented from splitting so easily) by tapering the end
to a point instead. The difference between the toy bow and the general
South Andaman bow is the presence in the latter of the two blades and
the waist. The broadening of the bow into the blades is necessary in
order to prevent it from accidentally reversing itself.

We have still to consider the modified form of the Jarawa bow. The
origin of this is easy to discover by the examination of a few typical
specimens. Since the Jarawa have been in the South Andaman they have
been in hostile contact with the tribes of the South Andaman Division.
They have had opportunities of handling bows of the kind made by these
tribes, and they have apparently discovered that these bows are more
efficient than their own, but they have had no opportunity, such as
only friendly intercourse would give, of discovering the principles on
which the South Andaman bow is made. They have attempted to imitate it
to the best of their ability, and this they have done (1) by making
their bows longer and broader, (2) by making them concavo-convex in
section instead of convexo-convex, (3) by cutting them occasionally
from wood that gives them an outward curve in the lower portion, (4) by
imitating the shape of the handle without, however, giving the bow a
waist, (5) by serving over the bow-string with thread at the point
where the arrow touches it, (6) by ornamenting their bows with incised
and painted patterns. These are the only differences between the
modified Jarawa type and the Little Andaman type, and all these may be
explained as attempts to imitate the bows of the South Andaman
Division. In not a single one of the modified Jarawa bows that I have
seen is the fundamental principle of the South Andaman bow successfully
applied.

We may conclude that the ancestors of the Andamanese at one time used a
bow resembling that in use in the Little Andaman at the present day,
and that the S-shaped bow of the Great Andaman has been invented since
the separation of the two main divisions of the race.

It is not possible, owing to lack of sufficient information, to
determine exactly the types of bow used by the Semang. The following
notes are based on only six specimens, two of which are in the Museum
of Ethnology at Cambridge [249], while the others are in the British
Museum. Four of the specimens are sufficiently similar to one another
to be regarded as belonging to one type, which seems to be the usual
type of Semang bow. In length they are 165, 174·5, 182 and 197·5 cm.,
and at the middle they vary in breadth between 2·5 and 3 cm. Three are
of palm-wood, and the other is of a light-coloured but tough kind of
wood. The shape of the section in the middle of the bow varies
considerably in the different specimens, as shown in Fig. 15. There is
some uncertainty as to which is the inside, and which is the outside of
the bow. At each end there is a shoulder, the point or tip at one end
being in every instance considerably longer than the other. The string
in each case is a three-ply rope, having a spliced eye at one end and
being fastened to the bow with a knot at the other end.

The other two specimens do not conform to this type. One is of wood,
134 cm. long, and 3·5 cm. broad in the middle. One end is provided with
a notch on each side for the string, while the other end has three
pairs of notches. The string is a three-ply cord with a loop or eye at
each end. The other specimen is made of bamboo, and is 147 cm. long and
2·25 cm. broad in the middle. One end has one pair of notches and the
other has two pairs. The string is two-ply with a loop at each end.

What we may perhaps regard as the usual type of Semang bow thus differs
from the bow of the Little Andaman in three important respects, (1) in
having a longer point at one end than at the other [250], (2) in having
a string of three-ply rope instead of a strand of twisted fibre, and
(3) in the variations in the section at the middle. From the four
specimens available it is not possible to determine around what norm or
norms the section of different specimens varies.

Turning to the Negritos of the Philippine Islands, although a number of
bows have been described by Meyer [251], the available information is
not sufficient to enable us to determine what are the different types,
and what is their relation one to another. Amongst the different
varieties of bow used by the Negritos there is one which is very
similar to the bow of the Little Andaman. It has a rounded or convex
outer side, and a flattened inner side. The string loops on to a point
at each end, and the string itself is formed of twisted fibre.

From a study of the available material it seems that we are justified
in concluding that the primitive Negrito bow was made of wood, with a
shoulder at each end, probably with a section rounded on one side and
flattened or keeled on the other, and that it had a string of twisted
fibre with a loop or eye at one end, the other end being attached with
a knot.

The Andaman Islanders use two different kinds of arrows, one for
shooting fish and the other for shooting pigs.

The common fish-arrow, as at present used in all parts of the Great
Andaman Division, consists of three parts—a shaft, a fore-shaft, and a
point. The shaft is a length of bamboo straightened by means of heat,
and may vary in length from 70 to 110 cm. At one end the bamboo is cut
off about 3 cm. beyond one of the nodes, and a nock is made (Fig. 16).
At this end the shaft is roughened with a Cyrena shell so as to give a
firm grip for the fingers. At the other end the shaft is tapered for
about a centimetre. At this end the bamboo is roughened with a shell to
give a hold to the thread with which it is bound. The fore-shaft is a
length of wood from 15 to 40 cm. long. One end is slightly tapered so
that it fits tightly into the end of the bamboo shaft. The other end is
tapered to a point, which is flattened on one side. The fore-shaft is
inserted into the end of the shaft and the joint is bound over for a
distance of about 2·5 cm. with thread. The point consists of a piece of
iron wire, sharply pointed at both ends. This is laid against the
flattened side of the fore-shaft and is bound to it with thread in such
a way that one point projects at the back to form a barb (Fig. 16).
When the binding is completed it is covered entirely over with a
composition made by melting together bees’-wax, resin and red ochre.
The composition is melted over a fire, is applied with a short piece of
wood and is then smoothed over with a hot Cyrena shell. Only the
binding attaching the point to the fore-shaft is covered with
composition, and not that at the joining of the fore-shaft and the
shaft.

Arrows of this kind are used for shooting fish, but they also serve to
shoot snakes or rats and on rare occasions birds.

Similar fish-arrows are made in the Little Andaman, but they are larger
(i.e. both longer and thicker) than those of the Great Andaman
Division. The two ends of the bamboo shaft are not roughened, and the
binding attaching the point to the fore-shaft is not covered with
composition (which seems to be unknown in the Little Andaman) but with
bees’-wax only.

This seems to be the traditional form of fish-arrow of the Andamans.
Before iron was plentiful the point consisted either of the serrated
bone from the tail of the sting-ray or of a piece of the tibia of a pig
ground down to the requisite dimensions on a piece of stone, and
sharpened at each end.

In the Little Andaman fish-arrows are sometimes used with two or four
prongs attached to a bamboo shaft. In the British Museum there is an
arrow from the North Sentinel Island with four prongs tied on to a
wooden shaft, each prong being barbed by a detached piece of wood at
the end.

A simple form of arrow is made in both the Great Andaman and the Little
Andaman consisting of a bamboo shaft with a pointed wooden head, the
point being hardened in the fire. Such arrows are now very rarely used,
save for shooting at a mark, but it is probable that before iron was
plentiful they were used as a substitute for the fish-arrow described
above, being easier to make although less serviceable.

The pig-arrow in use in the Great Andaman consists of a shaft, and a
fore-shaft to which is attached a head. The shaft is a piece of the
wood of the Tetranthera lancæfolia, cut from the tree and straightened
by means of heat. At the narrower end a nock about 1 cm. deep is cut,
and the arrow is served with thread of Anadendron fibre for about 1·6
cm. above the nock, in order to prevent splitting. At the other end the
shaft is hollowed out to a depth of about a centimetre. This hollowing
is done with the point of a fish-arrow or other similar piece of
pointed iron. For a distance of about 1·5 cm. the end of the shaft is
served over with thread of Anadendron fibre, so as to prevent it from
splitting.

The fore-shaft consists of a piece of tough wood one end of which is
cut to such a size that it will fit fairly tightly into the hollow at
the end of the shaft. At the other end it is split so as to admit the
head.

The head consists of a piece of iron broken into shape with the aid of
a stone hammer and then ground down and sharpened on a whet-stone or
with a file if one be obtainable. The usual shape is shown in Fig. 17.
The head is inserted into the split end of the fore-shaft and the end
of the latter is then served over with thread. A few centimetres below
the head either one or two sharp-pointed pieces of iron wire are placed
against the fore-shaft in the same plane as the head and are bound
firmly to it with the thread, so as to provide a barb or barbs.

A cord is made and one end of it is attached to the shaft and the other
end to the fore-shaft. This cord is made as follows. A number of
strands of Anadendron fibre are taken and waxed with bees’-wax. These
are made into a cord by the same method as that described in connection
with the Great Andaman bow-string, one strand being wrapped round the
others. About 40 cm. of single cord is made in this way and the two
ends are tied together. A piece of elastic wood is bent into the form
of an arc and the loop of cord is placed over this so that it is
stretched tight. A length of thread (of Anadendron fibre) is made and
wound on to a fine netting needle or on to a thin slip of wood, and the
two cords as they are stretched side by side are bound together with
this thread by the process known as “nippering” (Fig. 19). In this way
a firm and strong flattened cord is produced. One end of this is
fastened to the fore-shaft immediately above the end that fits into the
shaft. The other end is fastened to the shaft a few centimetres from
the end, leaving a short length of the shaft around which the cord may
be spirally wound when the arrow is in use. (Fig. 18.)

Finally, the thread on the fore-shaft, i.e. that which holds the head
and barbs in place, and also that which serves to attach the end of the
cord, are covered with the composition already described as used on
fish-arrows.

Arrows of this kind are used in pig-hunting. The fore-shaft is inserted
into the end of the shaft, the cord attaching the two being wound
spirally round the end of the shaft. When a pig is struck the barbs
prevent the head from coming out of the wound. As the pig attempts to
run away the shaft catches against the undergrowth of the jungle and
comes loose from the fore-shaft. Sooner or later the shaft becomes
entangled in the undergrowth and holds the wounded pig fast till the
hunters can come up with it and despatch it. It is obvious that the
cord of the arrow needs to be so strong that the pig cannot break it.

The natives of the Great Andaman tribes say that before they had plenty
of iron they made similar pig-arrows with heads of shell and barbs of
pig’s bone.

The natives of the Little Andaman make a pig-arrow very similar to that
of the Great Andaman tribes, but on the average somewhat longer. The
cord attaching the fore-shaft to the shaft consists of a length of
double two-ply rope of Hibiscus fibre. The binding of the arrow is done
with thread of the Gnetum fibre instead of Anadendron, and is not
coated with composition but is smeared with bees’-wax. The barb (there
being usually only one) is not fixed in the same plane as the head, but
in the plane at right angles to it. (Fig. 20.)

Amongst the Jarawa the head of the pig-arrow is attached to the
fore-shaft by a different method, holes being made in the iron through
which the thread that holds it is passed. (Fig. 21.)

Another kind of pig-arrow is sometimes made in the Great Andaman that
has not a detachable head. The shaft is a length of bamboo into one end
of which is fitted a fore-shaft of wood. The end of this fore-shaft is
split and a head of iron is inserted into it and bound there. Such an
arrow may be without barbs or may have one or two barbs of iron. It is
used only rarely and then chiefly for despatching a pig that has
already been struck by an arrow of the usual kind. The natives say that
in former times arrows of this kind were used in fighting in preference
to ordinary pig-arrows, which, however, were also used.

In former times the natives of the Great Andaman, according to their
own statements, made an arrow consisting of a bamboo shaft at the end
of which was inserted a head made of Areca wood. An arrow of this kind,
made for me by a native, is shown in Fig. 22.

None of the arrows made in any part of the Andamans is feathered.

In a comparison of the arrows of the Andamanese with those of the
Semang and the Philippine Negritos the most interesting point is that
all three branches of the Negrito race use arrows with detachable
heads. Arrows of this kind from the Philippines are described by Meyer
[252].

An important point of difference would seem to be that while the
Andamanese do not feather their arrows the Semang and the Negritos of
the Philippines do so. It would seem, however, from the account of
Semang arrows given by Skeat [253] that the feathering is such that it
is of no actual service in directing the flight of the weapon, and that
it is doubtful whether the Semang really understand the principle of
feathering, or whether they do not employ it as the mutilated survival
of more intelligent methods or perhaps make use of it for solely
magical purposes.

Another important point of difference is that the Semang poison their
arrows, while the Andamanese do not. In this connection it must be
remembered that the former people have for long been neighbours of
people who use blow-pipes with poisoned darts.

After the bow and arrow the most important hunting weapon of the Great
Andaman is the harpoon which is used in capturing dugong, turtle,
porpoise, and large fish. The harpoon consists of a head, a shaft and a
line. The line is a length of rope of Hibiscus fibre of as much as
twenty fathoms or more in length. The shaft is a bamboo of about 18
feet in length. One end is cut off fairly near a node and is then
served over with thread, and slightly hollowed. The head consists of a
long piece of iron, such as a stout nail, brought to a sharp point at
one end. The other end is served over with thread in such a way as to
make it fit fairly tightly into the end of the bamboo shaft. Some
distance from the point of the head two barbs of iron are attached by
thread, and between this point and the lower end the line is attached.
(See Fig. 23.)

A man using the harpoon stands on the forward platform of the canoe,
holding the bamboo shaft in his hand. The head is inserted in the upper
end of this, and the line passes over his shoulder and is coiled in the
bottom of the canoe, the other end being attached to the forward
out-rigger boom or to the thwart that takes its place in a large canoe.
He poles the canoe along the reef with the harpoon shaft. When about to
make a throw he raises the shaft till he can hold the butt end in his
right hand, with the point directed towards the fish or turtle, and he
then leaps forward so that if he succeeds in his aim the weapon strikes
with all the force of his weight behind it. When the turtle or fish is
struck the bamboo shaft floats loose and this is secured by the man in
the water, who returns to the canoe. It may be necessary to strike the
prey with a second harpoon, but if the first was well thrown the animal
is firmly held by the line.

Harpoons are not used in the Little Andaman. The natives of the Great
Andaman say that they themselves have only used them since they were
able to obtain iron and that before that time they could only capture
turtle and dugong in nets. It would seem therefore that the harpoon has
been invented or adopted by the tribes of the Great Andaman Division in
comparatively recent times, and was not an element of the primitive
Andamanese culture.

The turtle net is no longer used, as the natives prefer the harpoon and
have all the iron they need. Such nets were formerly made of rope of
Hibiscus fibre. A net was about 150 cm. in width and of variable
length. One specimen that was made for me had an open mesh of about 25
cm. square, while another had a smaller mesh. The knot used in a net
from the South Andaman is the ordinary fisherman’s knot shown in Fig.
24 b. In a net from the North Andaman the knot used is a slip-knot, one
strand being tied with an overhand knot over another which it crosses
at right angles as shown in Fig. 25.

Each end of the turtle net is attached to a stake pointed at the lower
end. The lower edge of the net is weighted with stones attached as
shown in Fig. 24, while to the upper edge are attached a number of
floats, each consisting of a long thin stick of Hibiscus wood to the
upper end of which is attached a tassel of fibre.

The net was placed in shallow water so that the stones rested on the
bottom while the tassels at the upper ends of the floats appeared above
the surface. As soon as a turtle was entangled in the net the agitation
could be observed by those watching who would proceed to the spot to
secure their capture.

So far as is known it would seem that nets of this description are not
used in the Little Andaman.

The Andamanese make practically no use of spears. At the present time
the natives of the Great Andaman Division sometimes make pig-spears of
a length of stout cane or rattan with a head of iron attached. The
natives themselves say that such spears have only been made since the
occupation of the islands, and it is probable that they were first made
in imitation of spears used by Burmese convicts for pig-hunting. They
are hardly ever used, the pig-arrow being preferred.

The true fish-spear is unknown in the Andamans though use is sometimes
made of a harpoon similar to the turtle harpoon, but of smaller
dimensions and with a finer line, for harpooning fish.

In the North Andaman a sort of fish-gig was formerly in use made of
about twelve pieces of Areca wood of about 105 to 110 cm. long and 1
cm. or less broad and with tapered and sharp-pointed ends. These were
fastened side by side by means of a strip of wood near one end, as
shown in Fig. 26. This weapon was used for spearing small fish in pools
on the reef.



CUTTING IMPLEMENTS.

At the present time the Andamanese make use of iron for their cutting
implements. It is uncertain when they first learnt the use of iron, but
it was certainly before the end of the eighteenth century. What iron
they had was obtained from wrecks, of which there have always been a
number on the Andamans. The metal has only become plentiful since the
European settlement of 1858.

It is highly probable that the Andamanese, though they may have learnt
the use of iron from implements used by visitors to their shores, have
not learnt from any other people the method of working the metal. Even
at the present day they do not make any use of heat in the manufacture
of their iron implements, the metal being worked cold. It seems highly
probable that they have simply adopted in connection with iron the
methods they formerly used in dealing with other materials,
particularly shells.

The materials used by the Andamanese, apart from iron, are wood, bone,
shell and stone. We may begin by considering their use of stone.

In former times quartz flakes were used by the Andamanese for the two
purposes of shaving and scarifying the skin, and for hardly any other
purpose. (Among minor uses of stone flakes may be mentioned those of
cutting the finger-nails, and sharpening boars’ tusks.) A quartz pebble
is held in the left hand and is struck with a hard rounded pebble of
any suitable kind. A flake is thus knocked off and falls into the palm
of the left hand. The flake is examined, and if it be suitable it is at
once used. If it be unsuitable it is thrown away and another made. For
shaving, flakes with a sharp blade-like edge are required; for
scarifying, flakes with a fine point are preferred. A flake is used
till its fine edge is lost and is then thrown away and another made.
Thus a woman who is shaving some one’s head may use as many as twenty
flakes one after another, and to obtain twenty suitable flakes she
probably makes as many as forty or even more. The kitchen-middens or
heaps of refuse that are found on the sites of old encampments contain
thousands of quartz pebbles that have been used as cores, and thousands
of flakes.

Besides quartz there is a flinty kind of stone that is used in much the
same way for making flakes. Suitable pieces of the stone are obtained
and are placed in the fire for a few hours. They are taken out, and
when they are cold are used in exactly the same way as a quartz pebble.

At the present time quartz is hardly ever used in this way, for the
natives greatly prefer glass, and they obtain sufficient old bottles
from Port Blair to satisfy their requirements. The bottom of a bottle
is treated in every way as though it was a quartz pebble, a flake being
knocked off and used, and then another and so on till the operation in
hand (whether shaving or scarifying) is completed. The flake is held
between the thumb and first finger when it is being used. In no case is
a flake of quartz or glass ever kept. It is only made when required and
after having been used is thrown away.

The natives themselves say that they formerly never made any use of
stone for cutting purposes save in the case of stone flakes as
described above. As against this there are three statements that must
be considered. Colebrooke, who visited the islands in 1789, says of the
Andamanese that “their canoes are hollowed out of the trunks of trees
by means of fire and instruments of stone, having no iron in use
amongst them, except such utensils as they have procured from the
Europeans and sailors who have lately visited these islands; or from
the wrecks of vessels formerly stranded on their coasts.” The accuracy
of Colebrooke’s statement is made doubtful by the fact that at the
present time (since 1858) the natives do not use fire in making their
canoes, and it seems improbable that if they had this custom in 1789
they should have discontinued it and have entirely forgotten that it
ever existed. Further if they used implements of stone in 1789 it is
certainly strange that by 1858 they should have entirely forgotten that
they ever did so. When Mr Man was making his enquiries the oldest men
all agreed in stating that they never used stone for their adzes. We
may conclude that Colebrooke’s statement is untrustworthy.

Stoliczka records the finding in the South Andaman of a stone celt and
a stone arrow-head in the kitchen-middens of the South Andaman. The
chief reason for doubting the value of this find is that Stoliczka
states that these implements were made of tertiary sandstone, which it
is very hard to believe would be of any use whatever. We may therefore
adopt the opinion of M. Lapicque [254] that Stoliczka had found
fragments of a whet-stone of sandstone and had been mislead into
thinking that he had found an axe and an arrow-head.

A third statement that needs to be considered is one by Mr Portman, who
presented to the British Museum an arrow with a head of stone made
specially for him by a native of the North Andaman who stated that in
former times such arrow-heads were used by the Andamanese. At the
present time the arrow-head is broken and it would seem to be so
fragile as to be entirely worthless for the purpose to which it was
supposed to be put. The natives of the North Andaman whom I questioned
stated that they did not use stone for their arrow-heads, but shell. We
may therefore hold that the evidence given by Mr Portman is not at all
satisfactory.

In the Akar-Bale tribe I heard a legend that at a certain spot there is
a kind of stone which was used by the ancestors for making adzes. I
visited the spot and the stone was pointed out to me. Unfortunately the
specimen that I took was lost and I am therefore unable to state what
the stone was, but it was such that it would have been utterly
impossible to make any sort of adze out of it. It was of a crystalline
nature and was easily fractured by a blow against even a soft substance
such as wood. It was clear that the native statements about it were
merely a legend having no historical value.

We may justifiably conclude that it is probable that the statement of
the natives to the effect that before they possessed iron in any
quantity they made their adzes and arrow-heads out of shell and not out
of stone, is correct. Their use of stone for cutting was therefore
confined to the flakes which have been described.

The most important material to the Andamanese seems to have been shell.
Mollusc shells were used in the natural form or after having been
manufactured. The chief shell used in its natural form is the Cyrena
which serves at the present time as a knife, a scraper and a spoon.
Even when they have knives of iron and steel they still use the Cyrena
shell in preference for some purposes. It is used as a scraper in
preparing fibres for rope and thread, in making arrows, as a knife for
cutting thatching leaves and cane and even thread and rope, and for
making incised patterns on bows and arrows. The shells are always to be
found lying about their encampments, and a few are always carried with
them when they migrate to a fresh camp. Those living inland obtain
their supply of shells from their friends on the coast.

When in use the shell is clasped between the thumb and first finger,
the thumb passing over the convex side and the finger round the hinged
edge. The remaining fingers are used to clasp the object that is being
scraped or cut. In cutting, the motion is away from the body, being
produced by a twist of the wrist. In scraping the motion is away from
the body, or from left to right. A knife of iron or steel is held in
this way by the natives whenever it is used for any purpose for which
they formerly would have used a shell. The blade is clasped near the
handle between the thumb and first finger, the back of the blade
pressing against the root of the thumb, and the handle away from the
body.

Another shell that is used in its natural form is a small whelk shell
that is used as a scraper for scraping off the outer skin of mangrove
seeds in preparing them for food.

A shell that is used in very nearly its natural form is a kind of pearl
shell that grows along creeks through the mangrove swamps. The shell is
only very slightly curved and it is for this reason that it is selected
as suitable. The weak edge or lip of the valve is broken away, and the
edge is then slightly ground on a stone. This implement is used by
women for slicing yams and certain other vegetables such as some kinds
of seeds when they are being prepared for food.

The natives say that before iron was plentiful they used shells for the
heads of their pig-arrows. Several different species of shell seem to
have been used, the chief concern being to obtain a piece of sufficient
size that was as nearly flat as possible. Such shells are those
belonging to the larger bivalves. The natives state that their method
of working the shell was to break it roughly into shape with stones and
then grind it down on a whet-stone until it was given a sufficiently
sharp point and edge. Some arrow-heads of shell were made for me by
this method at my request by one of the old men of the North Andaman.

The natives state that before they had iron they made their adzes of
shell. Two different men of the North Andaman made two shell adzes for
me, one of Pinna shell, and the other of a shell that I omitted to
identify. The Pinna shell adze seemed to me only suitable for light
work such as finishing off a bow or a canoe, as it seemed likely to
break under a strong blow. The other adze was much stronger and
therefore capable of heavy work, and although the edge seemed to me to
make it a poor implement with which to cut down a tree yet it certainly
did not seem less suitable than the stone adzes used by many primitive
peoples. If I were given a choice of implements with which to fell a
tree, between the shell adze of the Andamanese and a stone axe of
South-western Australia I should certainly choose the former.

According to the natives they formerly used bone for the points of
their fish-arrows and for the barbs of their pig-arrows. For both of
these purposes they now use iron. The bone was broken into a piece of
suitable length and then ground down with a whet-stone. Apparently the
bone most frequently used was the tibia of the pig. For their
fish-arrows they also made use of the bone of the tail of the
sting-ray,—its “sting.” When the fish was caught the bone was knocked
off and reserved for use. It required no treatment whatever, being
simply bound on to the point of the fore-shaft in the same way that an
iron point is now attached.

Colebrooke, in 1789, described their arrows as “headed with fish-bones
or the tusks of wild hogs, sometimes merely with a sharp bit of wood
hardened in the fire.” By fish-bone he probably means the bone of the
sting-ray. Where he writes the tusks of wild hogs we should probably
read “the bones.” A boar’s tusk is curved, and it seems impossible to
imagine how it could possibly be used as an arrow-head or arrow-point.

The boar’s tusk is used by the Andamanese as an implement, however,
making a very efficient sort of spokeshave. The edge which is used is
kept sharp by scraping with a quartz or glass flake or with a Cyrena
shell. The edge is near the point (at a in Fig. 27) and the tusk is
clasped at the other end between the forefinger and the root of the
thumb (at b in Fig. 27), the movement being away from the body. It is
used for planing bows and paddles, and in the hands of an Andaman
Islander is a very efficient implement, producing a beautifully smooth
and even surface.

Of wood the Andamanese formerly made knives and arrow-points. The
knives were made of a slip of bamboo or cane shaped and sharpened with
a Cyrena shell. Such knives were used for cutting meat and apparently
for no other purpose. A knife was always attached by a short length of
cord to a skewer of pointed Areca wood. The double implement was used
in cooking and eating, the skewer serving to lift pieces of meat in and
out of a pot, while the knife served to cut them. At the present time
the cane or bamboo knife is replaced by a knife made from hoop-iron,
but the shape of the original implement is retained as nearly as
possible and a skewer of Areca wood is generally attached to it.

As has been already stated the Andamanese formerly used hard wood such
as that of the Areca palm for the points and heads of their arrows.
They do not seem to have made use of bamboo in this way.

At the present time iron is used for the blades of adzes, for the heads
and barbs of pig-arrows, the points of fish-arrows, the heads of
harpoons, and for knives. The method of working the metal is apparently
exactly the same as the method they formerly used for working shell and
bone. For the head of a pig-arrow a suitable piece of iron is taken and
a fragment of about the right size is broken off by means of a stone
hammer. This is then roughly broken into the required shape, no heat
being used, and no advantage being taken of the malleability of the
metal. The next process is to grind it on a whet-stone. The natives are
always eager to obtain files which enable them to do this part of the
work much more rapidly. When the arrow-head has been ground into shape
the edges are sharpened. Blades for adzes are made in exactly the same
way from any suitable piece of iron or steel, such as a cutlass or an
old file or a piece of thick hoop-iron. The adze-blade is attached to a
handle of mangrove wood by the method shown in Fig. 28.

The barbs of pig-arrows and the points of fish-arrows are made in the
same way by breaking the metal into a suitable shape and then grinding
it on a whet-stone. It is probable that this was the method that was
formerly used for dealing with bone for these purposes.

In the case of the knife, iron or steel is now substituted for cane or
bamboo, but the knife has retained its shape in spite of the change of
material. The shape of a knife, whether of cane or of iron, with its
attached skewer of Areca wood is shown in Fig. 28.

In the case of the harpoon the native tradition is that this implement
was only made after they had discovered the use of iron.

At the present time both the Semang and the Negritos of the Philippines
make use of iron. The Semang heat the iron until it is red-hot and then
batter it into shape between two stones [255]. The shapes of the iron
weapons and implements which they make follow fairly closely those made
by the Malays.

In an attempt to reconstruct the primitive Negrito culture it would
seem that the most reasonable hypothesis is that the primitive Negritos
had no knowledge of iron and had not learnt to fashion implements out
of stone, but relied entirely on such materials as wood, bone and
shell. The Andamanese, becoming possessed of iron through wrecks upon
their islands, applied to it the technique that they had developed for
dealing with shell, and thereby invented their present method of
working iron without heating it. The Semang and the Negritos of the
Philippines probably first learnt the use of iron from their neighbours
of other races. There is not at present any evidence to show that the
Negritos ever had any method of working stone except the very simple
one at present in use in the Andamans for making flakes.



STRING, ROPE, MATS, BASKETS, AND NETTING.

For string, rope and thread the Andaman Islanders make use of a number
of different vegetable substances, but they make no use whatever of any
animal substances. Some of the more important fibres, with their uses
and the methods of preparing them, are mentioned below.

The bark of the Hibiscus tiliaceus, which occurs in the beach
vegetation in all parts of the islands, provides the Andamanese with
one of their most important fibres. By the coast-dwellers of the Great
and Little Andaman Divisions it is used for making rope. In the Great
Andaman Division the rope made from it was formerly used for making
turtle nets, and is now used for the lines of turtle harpoons, and for
hawsers to attach a canoe either to a stone used as an anchor or to a
tree. No other fibre is used for these purposes. The Hibiscus rope does
not seem to be much affected by salt water. The forest-dwellers of the
Great Andaman have less use for rope, and at the same time are not able
to obtain so readily the Hibiscus fibre. What rope they do have is
therefore obtained from the coast-dwellers or is made of some other
fibre. In the Little Andaman the Hibiscus is regularly used for rope.
It is also used for the short cord by which the detachable head of the
pig-arrow is attached to the shaft. In the Great Andaman a strip of the
bark of the Hibiscus is used for the sling in which children are
carried. Strips of the bark are worn by the women of the Little Andaman
across their shoulders and breasts, as a sort of ornament.

To obtain the fibre young straight shoots of about 120 cm. in length
are cut from the tree, those free from gnarls, and having a smooth
bark, being chosen. The bark (inner and outer layers) is peeled off in
strips of from 1·5 to 3 cm. in width. The inner or liber layer is then
separated from the outer layer of the bark, is well scraped with a
Cyrena shell and dried in the sun or over a fire. When dry it is worked
in the hands until the various layers of fibre separate one from
another. It is then ready to be made into rope. The fibre is
interlacing, and when freshly made is a lustrous greyish brown. After
exposure to salt water it turns a dark brown.

Mr E. H. Man, in his work on the Andamans, speaks of the Melochia
velutina as providing fibre for rope. This is an error. The tree to
which Mr Man refers is the Hibiscus tiliaceus. It is extremely common
on the shores of the islands, as it is in many other parts of the
tropics. It is very easily identified, as it bears its characteristic
yellow flowers for a long time every year. There is no doubt whatever
that this is the tree from which the natives regularly obtain the fibre
for the rope they use in turtle-hunting and fishing and in their
canoes. Other writers, following Mr Man, have repeated his error in
calling it the Melochia velutina, for example Sir Richard Temple and Mr
Portman. In Mr Portman’s collection of photographs in the British
Museum there is a good photograph of a Hibiscus tiliaceus tree labelled
“Melochia velutina.” I looked carefully in the Andaman jungles for the
Melochia velutina but was unable to find it, and I am quite certain
that in any case, even if it be found there, it is not commonly used by
the natives for rope.

The bark of a number of other trees provides fibre of which the natives
occasionally make use. Amongst these are one or more species of
Sterculia (S. villosa?), and a tree that I identified somewhat
doubtfully as Grewia laevigata. The coarse fibre of the liber layer of
these trees may be made into rope by the same method as that employed
in dealing with Hibiscus tiliaceus. Very little actual use is made of
them however. A fibre which looks very like that obtained from one
species of Sterculia is frequently used by the natives of the Little
Andaman (and also by the Jarawa) for their personal ornaments. Mr
Portman says that this fibre is obtained from the Celtis cinnamonea.

A species of Hibiscus, which I believe is Hibiscus scandens, growing in
the jungles and not along the shore, provides a fibre that is prized by
the natives of the Great Andaman tribes for making string or fine rope.
The fibre is less easily obtained than that of the Hibiscus tiliaceus,
but owing to its quality (it is not so interlacing) is capable of being
made into finer rope and string. It is often made into string and then
used for making netted bags. I did not find this fibre in use in the
Little Andaman, but as it is not very often met with even in the Great
Andaman, it may possibly be used in the Little Andaman.

There are several species of Ficus in the Andaman forests, and the
natives know that they can obtain fibre from the bark of these trees.
The only one that is regularly made use of is the Ficus laccifera. The
natives of the Great Andaman Division use the bark of this tree for
making their personal ornaments. In the Little Andaman it is used for
bow-strings. A fibre called in the Little Andaman ulu, and said by Mr
Portman to be obtained from the Ficus hispida, is used in that island,
and by the Jarawa, for making personal ornaments.

The Gnetum edule, a climbing plant that is fairly common, is used in
all parts of the Andamans for thread and string. The creeper is cut
into short lengths at the nodes and is dried for a few days. The outer
layer of bark is then scraped off with a Cyrena shell, and the liber
layer beneath it is peeled off in fine strips and these are made into
thread or string. This string is used in the Great Andaman Division for
making netted bags and fishing nets. In the Little Andaman it is used
for binding their arrows, as well as for netting.

The most valuable fibre of the Great Andaman tribes is that of the
Anadendron paniculatum, which is used for string and thread and for
bow-strings. Until recent times the method of preparing the fibre was
not known to the natives of the Little Andaman, but they have now
learnt it from the natives of the Great Andaman with whom they have
been brought in contact, and the use of the fibre for string and thread
is coming in amongst them.

The fibre is not easy to prepare. Long thin branches of the creeper are
cut, which must be neither too young nor too old. To obtain these it is
often necessary to climb up into high trees, for the Anadendron is a
climbing plant. The creeper is cut into lengths of from 20 to 40 cm.
The bark (inner and outer layers) is peeled off these in strips of from
7 to 10 mm. in width. A strip of the bark is taken and placed on the
thigh, inner surface downwards, and is scraped with a Cyrena shell
until the outer bark is entirely removed and the fibres remain clean
and separate. These are dried in the sun or over a fire and, if not
needed for immediate use, are stored for future occasion. The fibre is
fine and of a light greyish brown colour. In its qualities it somewhat
resembles ramie fibre. It is extremely strong.

There are a number of other trees and plants that are known by the
natives to afford fibre, but they are not used, or if they are, it is
extremely rarely.

The Andaman jungles have a number of different species of Calamus, and
the canes or rattans of these are put to all sorts of uses, such as the
making of baskets, the lashings and furnishings of canoes, and in
building huts. In the Little Andaman one species of cane is used to
provide the fibre for women’s belts. The outer skin is removed and the
remainder of the cane is divided into fine strips or threads. A bundle
of these tied together constitutes the belt worn by the women of the
Little Andaman. The outer sheath of the leaf-stem of the Calamus
tigrinus is used by the natives of the Great Andaman Division for
making mats. Lengths of the leaf-stem are cut and the outer skin is
removed in strips of about 3 to 5 mm. in width. The still adhering pith
is removed with a Cyrena shell, and the strips are dried in the sun and
then made into mats.

The leaf-stem of a species of palm is cut while green and is then
shredded into long strips. The fibre thus obtained really consists of
the leaflets of the young unopened leaves of the palm. It is used in
the Little Andaman to make the tassel that women wear over the pudenda.
The women of the North Andaman formerly wore a tassel of this fibre,
but have now discontinued the custom, since their contact with the
South Andaman. In the Great Andaman tribes this material has important
ceremonial uses. It is called ko̱ro in Aka-Jeru and ara in Aka-Bea, and
has been frequently mentioned in this volume. A tassel of the fibre is
suspended near the grave of a dead person and at the entrance of the
village at which the death took place. In the North Andaman a suspended
cane hung with a fringe of the fibre is erected for the peace-making
ceremony. (See Plate XIX.)

Two plants that were not identified are used in the North Andaman for
making baskets. The methods of preparing these will be described later.

The natives of the Great Andaman Division make use of the leaves of the
Pandanus Andamanensium for making belts for women and ornaments that
are worn on ceremonial occasions. These leaves do not seem to be used
in the Little Andaman.

The pods of one or more species of Dendrobium are collected by the
natives of both Great Andaman and Little Andaman. They are roasted in
the fire, until the outer skin turns a bright yellow, and this is torn
off in strips and used for ornamenting nets, baskets, rope, etc.

The above description includes all the more important vegetable
substances used by the Andamanese for their rope, string, netting, and
basket-work. There are many other substances that they might use if
they wished, of the properties of which they are fully aware. Their
knowledge of the trees and plants of the forests and of the peculiar
properties of each is very extensive. They themselves say that they use
only those that best serve their purposes.

The Andamanese make rope and string or thread, but in all cases it is
only two-ply. Rope is made by men only, and is used for the lines of
turtle harpoons, and was formerly used for turtle nets. The ropes made
from Hibiscus fibre are very strong and durable, being quite as good as
the best hempen ropes of the same diameter. In rope-making the Hibiscus
or other fibre (Sterculia or Grewia) is taken and twisted into a long
strand, either with the fingers, or on the thigh by rolling beneath the
palm of the hand, short lengths of fibre being added until a single
twisted strand of sufficient length and uniform thickness is produced.
The middle of this strand is passed over a piece of wood held by the
toes, one half of it being wound on to a reel (kutobi in Aka-Jeru) made
by tying together crossways two pieces of cane or wood each about 20
cm. long and 6 mm. in diameter. The other half of the strand is loose,
and is held (near the point where it is tied to the wood held in the
toes) between the finger and thumb of the left hand, the rest of it
passing across the palm, over the left forearm, under the armpit,
across the back and over the right shoulder, hanging down loosely to
the worker’s right side. This arrangement is in order that the loose
strand shall not become entangled or get in the man’s way as he works.
The reel is held in the right hand and is passed first under the left
hand, then back again over it, the two strands being thus twisted into
a firm two-ply cord.

The natives of the Little Andaman make rope in much the same way, but
they pass the reel from right to left over the other strand and back
under it, the twist being thus in the opposite direction from that used
in the Great Andaman.

String or thread is made by both men and women. It is put to many uses,
the chief being for binding the heads of arrows, harpoons and spears
and the ends of bows, and in making nets, baskets, mats and personal
ornaments. In making string the man or woman sits down with legs
outstretched. Thin strands of fibre, varying in thickness according to
the thickness of the string required, are taken and each twisted singly
by being rolled between the palm of the right hand and the right thigh,
the motion being away from the body. When a sufficient number of short
single strands has been thus made, two of them are taken and placed
together on the thigh, being held at one end in the left hand. The two
strands are rolled together beneath the palm of the right hand, the
motion being inwards towards the body. A well twisted thread is thus
produced. When some 10 cm. or so have been thus twisted, the thread is
rolled once beneath the palm of the hand in the opposite direction,
i.e. away from the body, this action rendering it more compact. As soon
as the end of the two strands that are being twisted is neared, two
more are taken and joined on, first one and then the other, by being
rolled in with the first two. Fresh strands are thus continually added
as the string grows in length. String of any desired length is made in
this way, of considerable strength and of surprisingly uniform
thickness.

String is made in this way from the fibre of Anadendron, Gnetum and
Hibiscus scandens in the Great Andaman Division, and from Gnetum and
ulu fibre in the Little Andaman. In the Great Andaman string made from
Anadendron fibre is rendered more durable by being waxed with black
bee’s-wax, but this treatment is not considered necessary for string
made from Gnetum fibre or from Hibiscus scandens.

Ornamental rope is made for men’s belts in the Great Andaman. Hibiscus
fibre is twisted into a single strand. Around this strand strips of
Dendrobium skin are wound spirally so that it is entirely covered, and
the strand itself is twisted into a two-ply cord.

Two other forms of cord have been already mentioned, namely the
bow-string, of twisted fibre of the Ficus laccifera in the Little
Andaman, and of wrapped fibre of the Anadendron in the Great Andaman
Division, and the special cord used in the Great Andaman for attaching
the head of a pig-arrow to the shaft. The Andamanese make very little
use of plaited cord. I have only met with it in personal ornaments made
of Pandanus leaf in the Great Andaman.

The mat-work of the Andamanese is very simple. The natives of the
Little Andaman make bamboo mats on which they sleep. Strips of bamboo
of about 120 cm. in length and ·75 cm. in width are attached by means
of thin strips of cane to other strips of bamboo at right angles to the
first series. The technique is illustrated in Fig. 29 which shows the
back and the front of a portion of such a mat. It is that usually known
as wrapped-twined work.

A similar technique is used in both the Little Andaman and the Great
Andaman in making thatching of cane-leaves. There is a difference,
however, the wrapping used in making thatch being that shown
diagrammatically in Fig. 30.

The natives of the Great Andaman make sleeping mats from the outer
sheath of the leaf-stem of the Calamus tigrinus. Lengths of the
material are prepared and cleaned and are cut to a uniform length,
generally about 60 to 80 cm., having a breadth of 3 to 5 mm. A length
of thread, generally of the less valuable Gnetum fibre, but
occasionally of Anadendron fibre, is made and is wound on to two
netting needles, one half on each. With this thread the strips of
cane-leaf are fastened together. The technique is different in the
North Andaman and in the South Andaman.

In the North the technique, which is represented diagrammatically in
Fig. 31, A is that known as wrapped-twined work. One of the two threads
of which the work is composed is held taut, the needle on which it is
wound being held in the toes, and the other thread is wrapped spirally
round it, one of the strips of cane-leaf sheath being enclosed at every
turn. Thus the method is exactly the same as that adopted in making
mats of thatch.

In the South the technique is that known as twined work or fitching.
The two wefts (i.e. the threads) are twisted together in the same
direction one under the other, enclosing at each half turn one of the
strips of leaf-sheath. This is shown diagrammatically in Fig. 31, B.

The mat is made by parallel lines of such twining or wrapped-twining.
At each side of the mat the line of threading is quite close to the
ends of the strips of which the mat is made. In the South Andaman the
work on each side of the mat is different from that in the middle. Each
of the two threads is alternately given a complete turn round one of
the strips of material.

Mats may be of any length, and examples vary from 1 metre to 10 metres.
When in use about a metre and a half is unrolled and the remainder
serves as a pillow. If the mat be short a split log does service as a
pillow instead, but the full-length mat is certainly a more comfortable
bed. When a mat begins to wear or fall to pieces in some part it is not
thrown away, but this part is kept rolled up, and an unbroken part of
the mat is unrolled to sleep on, the remainder being kept rolled up
either at the head, where it forms a pillow, or at the foot. An old mat
may be continually increased in length by additions made to it. The
work of making these mats is performed by women only.

The Jarawa and the natives of the Little Andaman make mats of a
somewhat similar pattern, but I have not been able to secure one so as
to see how it is made.

To explain the different forms of the Andamanese baskets, it is most
convenient to begin by considering the way in which the natives of the
North Andaman tie up their pots. The small cooking-pots of the North
Andaman are fragile things and are not easily made, and it is therefore
necessary to take care of them. A leaf of the Licuala palm is taken.
The leaflets are plaited over one another, close to the point of their
insertion in the petiole, so as to form a sort of rosette with leaflets
radiating from it in every direction (Fig. 32 a). This is laid on the
ground, the pot is placed on it upside down, and the leaflets are
brought up all round the pot so as to meet at the point, and are there
roughly fastened. Three strips of cane are then taken and are tied
together crossways in the middle so as to form a sort of six-rayed star
with six approximately equal angles. This is laid on the ground with
the outer surface of the canes downwards, the pot is placed on it
upside down, and the strips of cane are bent upwards over the pot so as
to meet at the point. The ends of two opposite strips of cane are left
projecting for a few centimetres above the point, and the ends of the
other four are fastened firmly down. Another strip of cane is now
fastened round the middle of the pot, being applied to the six canes
previously mentioned by wrapping, i.e. a turn is taken with it round
each of the six strips in turn. The pot is now safely tied up and can
be hung in the hut or carried on a journey without much fear of its
coming to grief. To use the pot it is of course necessary to untie it.
A pot wrapped up in this way is shown in Fig. 32 a and b.

In the South Andaman the pots have rounded bottoms. They are not tied
up in the same way as in the North Andaman, but for purposes of safety
and carriage each pot is provided with a rude basket. The basket is
made so as to fit the pot. Six strips of cane are taken and tied
together in the middle, as previously described. A stout strip of cane
is then taken and is bent round into a circle so as to be just a little
larger than the outside rim of the pot. This, which is to form the rim
of the basket, is placed in position and the six strips of cane before
mentioned are bent round and attached to it. The manner of attaching
the uprights of the basket to the rim is shown in Fig. 33. The strip of
cane forming the upright is thinned down beyond the point where it
reaches the rim. It is given one turn round the rim, ascending on the
outside and descending inside, then a half turn round the standing part
of itself, immediately below the rim from left to right, then another
complete turn round the rim ascending inside and descending outside, a
half turn behind its own standing part below the rim, a third complete
turn round the rim, and the end is fastened with an overhand knot.

A thinner strip of cane is now taken and wound round the six uprights
(the warp of the basket) being given a turn round one after another.
The technique is that known as wrapped work. If the strip be not long
enough another is joined to it with a reef or sailor’s knot. The weft
(as this thinner strip may be called) is given five or six spiral
turns, and thus leaves a very open and rather weak basket. The basket
is then further strengthened by other strips of cane attached by one
end to the rim and carried downwards, with one turn round each of the
horizontal canes (weft) and the other end attached to the centre of the
bottom of the basket. A strip of cane or bark is attached to the rim by
its two ends to provide a strap by which the basket with its pot may be
carried on the back. Before the pot is placed in it the basket is lined
with the leaflets of the Licuala palm.

We may now turn to the baskets of the Little Andaman, of which there
are two varieties, one made with more care than the other. As regards
shape both varieties are the same, and the shape is exactly that of the
Little Andaman pots.

The following is a description of a small but typical specimen of the
better variety of Little Andaman basket. The foundation consists of
twelve whole canes. A little under 80 cm. of the cane is left whole,
and at each end it is thinned down to a strip. The twelve canes are
taken in four bundles of three each and placed so as to cross each
other in the middle. They are bent into a somewhat conical shape, and
the ends (where the cane is thinned) are attached to a rim composed of
a whole cane bent into a circle and tied. The method by which each of
the uprights or stakes is attached to the rim is shown in Fig. 34. It
is almost identical with that used in the South Andaman pot basket. The
weaving is then begun near the bottom of the basket. A thin strip of
the outside of a cane is taken, and is applied to the uprights (warp or
stakes) by wrapped work, i.e. it is given a complete turn round each of
them in turn. This wrapped weaving is continued spirally from near the
bottom of the basket to near the rim. Near the top of the basket,
between 4 and 5 cm. from the rim, the weaving is so arranged that for
about three-quarters of the way round the basket there is a gap of
about 1·5 cm. between two rows of weft (see Fig. 34). The purpose of
this will be mentioned later. The basket now consists of a rim to which
are attached twelve uprights forming the warp of the basket, around
which a fine strip of cane has been spirally wrapped from the bottom to
the top. Twelve fine strips of the outside of a cane are now taken. One
end of each is fastened to the rim in between two of the stakes, the
mode of fastening being shown in Fig. 34. The strip is then carried
down the basket, on the outside, as far as the bottom row of weaving,
round which it is doubled, and is then wound spirally, from the bottom
to the top of the basket, around its own standing part, including at
each spiral turn one of the wefts. Thus each of these twelve strips of
cane is attached to the outside of the basket by the process known as
wrapped-twined work. The basket is furnished with a handle of bark
fibre which is attached by its two ends to the rim on that side where
there is no gap between the rows of weft near the top.

In the less carefully made baskets of the Little Andaman there are a
few important differences. The stakes of the basket are not thin whole
canes, but are strips of larger canes. The weft is applied in wrapped
work, as in the basket already described, but the rows of weft are not
so close together and are therefore not so numerous. After the first
process, when the basket consists of stakes and horizontal (spiral)
weft only, vertical strengthening strips are added, but these are
applied, not in wrapped-twined work as in the basket described, but in
wrapped work, in exactly the same way as in the South Andaman
pot-basket. Thus, apart from its shape, which is that of the Little
Andaman pot, the Little Andaman basket of this kind is very similar to
the South Andaman pot-basket.

The natives of the Little Andaman make pots that are much larger and
deeper than those of the South Andaman, and have a more rounded bottom
than those of the North Andaman. For every pot a basket is made that
exactly fits it, and in this basket it is stored and carried. Every
basket that is made in the Little Andaman, whether it be used for
carrying a pot or for any other purpose, is made of exactly the same
shape.

The purpose of the gap that is left near the top of the basket as
described above is in order that strips of string or fibre may be tied
across the mouth of the basket, from side to side, in order to keep its
contents safe.

We may now return to the Great Andaman and consider the baskets of the
South Andaman Group of tribes. These are made from the best canes. From
80 to 120 fine strips of cane are taken which are to form the stakes or
uprights. A slight hollow is made in the ground, and the strips of cane
are placed crossways across one another in this hollow, the inner
surfaces of the canes being downwards. As the strips are being
arranged, and when the weaving is begun, the centre, i.e., the point
where the strips cross one another in the middle of the hollow, is
pressed firmly beneath the heel so as to maintain them in position. The
first few strips are sometimes tied together in the middle, but this is
not always done. When all the strips are arranged evenly the weaving of
the basket is begun with a length of thread, which is slewed in and out
between the strips of cane, beginning as near the centre as possible,
the stroke being that of ordinary wicker-work. After four or five
spiral turns have been taken with the thread it is fastened. The bottom
of the basket is then reversed, the stakes being bent over, and the
weaving proper is begun with a fine strip of cane. This is applied by
wicker-work nearly as far as the top of the basket. At the top, the
weaving is finished off with three or four spiral turns of
wrapped-twined work in cane (see Fig. 35). The rim of the basket is
formed of a thin piece of wood (circular in section) bent round into a
circle of the right size and the two ends tied together. The stakes or
uprights are attached to this rim (after the weaving is finished) but a
space of about 5 cm. is left between the top of the weaving and the
rim. The mode of attaching the uprights to the rim is shown in Fig. 35.

The South Andaman basket is really a conical basket with the bottom
reversed or dented inwards to form a “kick” like the kick of a bottle.
If it were not for the kick it would be the same shape as the Little
Andaman basket. The kick enables it to stand upright, although it is
inclined to be top-heavy, but renders it unfit for carrying pots.

The space between the top of the weaving and the rim is to admit of
strings being tied across the mouth of the basket to keep its contents
safe.

A handle of Hibiscus fibre is attached to the rim and rests across the
front of the chest when the basket is carried on the back.

South Andaman baskets are sometimes ornamented, in the process of
making, with strips of Dendrobium skin, applied horizontally by
overlaid interlacing. The strip of Dendrobium skin is laid over the
weft and woven in with it for one turn round the basket. I have never
seen ornamentation with Dendrobium skin applied to the South Andaman
baskets by any method save this one.

Patterns of red paint and white clay are occasionally painted on
baskets when they are newly made. Shells are sometimes attached to
different parts of the basket by thread, for the purpose of ornament.

In the North Andaman, baskets are made that differ in several important
features from those of the South Andaman. They are not made of cane but
of two different materials. One of these is the stem of a creeper
called čup-to̱i. Lengths of the creeper are cut and dried and then split
lengthways into two or three pieces according to their size. The outer
bark or skin is then scraped off with a Cyrena shell. These strips are
to form the stakes or warp of the basket. The other material is another
creeper called bobi. The long tough tendrils of this plant are taken
and the soft outer sheath removed by drawing the tendril through a
piece of split cane or bamboo bent double so that the tendril is
scraped between the two inner surfaces. The fibre that remains is split
longitudinally into two pieces and dried.

A bundle of strips of the čup-to̱i is taken, sufficient in length and
number for the required size of basket. The bundle is divided into two
equal bundles and these are tied together in the middle crossways with
thread. This cross forms the beginning of the basket. The weaving is
begun with thread, which is slewed in and out between the warp, from 4
to 7 spiral turns being made. During this process the centre of the
basket, i.e., the cross, is pressed beneath the heel into a slight
hollow made in the ground, to give it a curve which, in the finished
basket, will form the “kick.” The thread is tied, the bottom is turned
upside down, the stakes are bent back and the weaving is continued, not
with thread but with strips of bobi, till a short distance from the top
of the basket, and then three or four rows of wrapped-twined work are
made, the strip of bobi being coiled round the basket and attached to
the uprights with thread. A rim is made of a strip of cane bent into a
circle. This is placed inside the uprights and tied to them in two or
three places. The remaining portion of each of the uprights, projecting
above the rim, is bent down outside and slightly obliquely, and tied
down by a thread passing over each in turn and round the rim. A very
rough and untidy rim is thus produced, and this is again served or
bound over with thread. A handle of Hibiscus fibre is added.

In the North Andaman baskets, as in those of the South Andaman, a space
of a few centimetres is left between the top of the weaving and the
rim, there being for that space only warp or uprights and no weft. This
allows string to be tied in any direction across the mouth of the
basket, so as to keep its contents safe.

The shape of the North Andaman baskets is different from that of the
southern baskets, the former having a sort of belly at the bottom and
narrowing somewhat above. The result is that the northern baskets will
stand more firmly, being less top-heavy when either full or empty than
those of the south.

In the North Andaman baskets are ornamented as they are made with
worked-in strips of Dendrobium fibre. There are several different
methods of working this ornamentation, resulting in different patterns.
Baskets are also ornamented, when new, with painted patterns in white
and red, though this is not general, and occasionally shells are
attached to them by thread.

One more form of basket-work remains to be briefly mentioned. The
natives of all parts of the islands were formerly in the habit of
preserving as trophies the skulls of pigs and turtle that were killed
in the chase. The natives of the Great Andaman Division do not now
trouble to preserve all the skulls of the pigs they kill, and they give
as their reason for this that now that they have dogs the hunting of
pigs is not a sport that requires any great skill. The Jarawa however
still keep up the old custom, and they go so far as carefully to encase
every skull in basket-work. As may be seen from Fig. 36 the basket-work
in question is of simple wrapped work, the material being strips of
cane.

It is of some interest to consider the different forms of technique
used by the Andamanese in dealing with flexible materials. Rope and
string are only made two-ply. It would seem that the Andamanese have
not discovered that three-ply cord is stronger for a given diameter
than two-ply. They have, in the bow-string of the Great Andaman, an
interesting form of cord that may perhaps best be described as wrapped
cord. The making of a rope involves the twisting of two strands of
material around one another. The making of a wrapped cord involves the
spiral wrapping of one strand of material round another. This is
exactly the same process as “serving,” and it is one that is used by
the Andamanese in all sorts of ways. In serving their arrows with
thread and in serving the ends of bows and the heads of harpoons the
Andamanese have several different methods of making fast the ends, and
I regret that I did not take more detailed notes on this subject. Their
skill in handling this technique is shown in the strength of the
binding on their arrows.

This spiral wrapping of one strand round a flexible or rigid object
lies at the base of much else in their technique. We have seen that
they make considerable use of wrapped-twined work. In this work a strip
of material crosses at right angles a number of strips of the same or
other material, and a weft is wound round the former, taking in one of
the latter at each turn. There are two methods of doing this, either by
simple spiral wrapping, as in the mats of thatch, or by what may be
called “right and left” or “zig-zag” wrapping, as in the bamboo mat of
the Little Andaman. A difference is also made according as the strip of
material around which the weft is wrapped is rigid, as in the Little
Andaman bamboo mat or in thatching, or flexible, as in the North
Andaman mat, where it is one thread while the weft is another thread.

Wrapped work, in which a strip of weft is wound successively round one
after another of a number of rigid stakes, is another very simple
process that is employed in a number of different ways by the
Andamanese. The most important development of wrapped work amongst them
is seen in the pot-basket of the South Andaman, in the baskets of the
Jarawa and Little Andaman and in the pig’s-skull basket-work of the
Jarawa.

Simple twined work is rare in the Andamans. There is hardly any example
of it except in the mats of the South Andaman. It would seem probable
that the North Andaman mat technique of wrapped-twined work is the
earlier, being more in agreement with what we may call the technical
habits of the Andamanese, and that the South Andaman mat technique is a
later elaboration. In this connection it may be remembered that
plaiting, in which also several wefts are twisted one over another, is
rarely used in the Andamans.

The process of nippering, by which the natives of the Great Andaman
make the cord of their pig-arrows, and the somewhat similar process
used in the Little Andaman in making personal ornaments, are quite in
accordance with the general trend of the technique, but when such a
process is applied to a number of parallel strips of material instead
of to two only it constitutes a step towards wicker-work. It is
notable, however, that it is only in the Great Andaman that wicker-work
is used, and this suggests that it has only been invented or adopted
since the separation of the two divisions of the Andamanese.

It is very tempting to regard the different forms of basket, in the
order in which they are described above, as so many stages of a process
of evolution. It is, at any rate, worth while to state the argument,
and to show what the differences between them exactly are. In the North
Andaman pot-covering we have (1) the technique simple wrapped work, and
(2) the basis six strips of cane tied together in the middle. In the
South Andaman pot-basket we have both these features, but the
difference in the shape of the pots allows them to be carried in a true
basket and we have therefore (3) a rim, with (4) a peculiar method of
attaching the uprights to the rim, (5) a number of horizontal (wrapped)
wefts instead of one or two, and (6) strengthening strips applied to
the horizontal wefts in wrapped work. In the rougher kind of basket
made in the Little Andaman we have nearly all the features of the South
Andaman pot-basket. The only differences, apart from the shape of the
basket, which in each case follows the shape of the pot, are (2) more
than six uprights may be used, and (5) the number of horizontal wefts,
i.e. the number of spiral turns taken round the basket, is as a rule
greater. In the more carefully made Little Andaman basket there are
several differences. The uprights are fine whole canes instead of
strips of split cane. It is undoubtedly more difficult to procure whole
canes of the proper size than simply to split up larger canes, but
where the technique is wrapped work the circular section of the
uprights improves the quality of the resulting basket, as a strip of
cane is more easily wound round a whole cane than round a split cane,
and there is less chance of it breaking when a strain is put upon it.
Another difference is that in the better Little Andaman baskets the
rows of weft are as close together as the peculiar technique will
allow. This makes a finer and stronger basket, and is an obvious
improvement. The third difference is that in these baskets the
strengthening strips are applied not in wrapped work, but in
wrapped-twined work, which, however, we have seen is a common technique
in the Andamans. In the better baskets of the Little Andaman we find a
special feature of some interest in the gap that is left in the weaving
near the rim, to allow of strings being tied across the mouth.

When we look at the South Andaman basket the first thing that strikes
us is that it is really a conical basket of much the same shape as the
Little Andaman basket, but with the bottom dented in to make a kick, so
allowing the basket to stand on its bottom. This denting is only
rendered possible, however, by the fact that the uprights of the South
Andaman basket are thin strips of cane that can be easily bent, and
this again depends on the use of wicker-work in the basket instead of
wrapped work. It must be remembered that the top of the weaving is
finished off with three rows of wrapped-twined work, and this suggests
that there may possibly have been a stage of development between the
Little Andaman basket and the South Andaman form, in which the uprights
were thin strips of cane, and the weft was applied in wrapped-twined
work from top to bottom. This, however, is only a surmise. It does
certainly seem probable that the South Andaman basket is derived
immediately from a form of basket similar to that of the Little
Andaman, the great difference being the change to wicker-work
technique. The method of attaching the uprights to the rim was
doubtless introduced owing to the fact that the original method is
unsatisfactory when the uprights are thin and easily broken strips,
instead of stout ones.

The North Andaman basket seems to have been derived from one similar to
that of the South Andaman by the introduction of two changes, (1) the
use of different materials, and (2) the change of shape. The materials
used in the north are such as to give a basket on the whole stronger
and more durable than that of the south. If a heavy weight be carried
in a southern basket the pressure of the basket on the back tends to
crack the canes of which it is composed. In the case of a northern
basket it may lose its shape, but the materials of which it is composed
will give or bend without cracking so readily. The shape of the
northern basket is certainly an improvement, as it avoids the
top-heaviness of the southern shape. Both the northern and the southern
baskets have a gap between the top of the weaving and the rim, like the
basket of the Little Andaman.

Thus every step, or nearly every step, in a hypothetical process of
evolution is exhibited in the different forms of basket-work. First we
have the pot-covering of the North Andaman, then the pot-basket of the
South Andaman, then the rougher kind of Little Andaman basket, of the
same shape as the pot, then the South Andaman basket of cane with a
kick and finally the basket of the North Andaman. The better kind of
Little Andaman basket is simply an independent improvement of the
other, involving no new technique.

However much or little probability we may attach to this hypothetical
reconstruction of the history of basket-work in the Andamans, one thing
does seem fairly certain, and that is that the original ancestors of
the Andamanese were not acquainted with wicker-work, or had no use for
it. In the Little Andaman Division only wrapped work and wrapped-twined
work are used, and the wicker-work of the Great Andaman Division has
almost certainly been adopted since the two divisions were separated.
The consideration of the general technical bias of the Andamanese in
their dealings with flexible materials supports the view that in their
case wicker-work is later than wrapped work and wrapped-twined work. It
seems more than likely that the Andamanese of the larger island have
invented wicker-work in its simplest form on the basis of a previous
technique of wrapped and wrapped-twined work. To us wicker-work seems
such a simple process as almost to need no inventing. It must be
recognized however that the general bias of the Andamanese is against
using materials in this way. The Andaman Islander shows a decided
preference for those processes in which he uses a single flexible
material which he winds or wraps round other rigid or flexible
material, as in nippering, or wrapped work or wrapped-twined work.

It is impossible to obtain confirmation of this view, however, from a
comparison of the Andamanese with the Semang and the Philippine
Negritos. The Semang make mat-work bags and wallets of check, and they
make (or use) baskets of hexagonal work. Both check and hexagonal work
are used by other races in the Malay Peninsula and in Malaysia
generally. The present mats and baskets of the Semang cannot therefore
be regarded as original Negrito productions. They have almost certainly
been adopted through contact with other cultures.

The same thing would seem to apply to the present basket-work of the
Philippine Negritos, of which however we know very little.

Netted bags of string are made by the women of both the Great Andaman
and the Little Andaman Divisions, and are used for carrying or storing
small objects such as shells, fruit, roots, etc. The string used for
these is made from the fibre of the Gnetum edule in the Little Andaman,
and is generally made from the same fibre in the Great Andaman, but in
the latter division the fibre of Hibiscus scandens is prized for this
purpose and is used instead of that of the Gnetum when it is available.
Small hand fishing nets are made by the women in both divisions from
thread of Gnetum fibre. In the Great Andaman Division netting is also
used for personal ornaments, the thread used for this purpose being
generally made from Anadendron fibre.

The mode of netting is always the same. Netting needles are used, made
from slips of bamboo or cane, and varying in size according to the work
for which they are intended. The netting string or thread is wound on
to this needle. For the foundation of the net a short length of string
is taken and the two ends tied together, the loop thus formed being
placed over the big toe as the woman sits on the ground.

The knot used in netting is that known as the fisherman’s knot, in use
all over the world. The needle is held in the right hand, is passed
from above downwards through the loop marked a in the figure, and is
drawn through far enough to leave a new loop b of the required size.
This loop is held between the thumb and forefinger of the left hand,
the uniformity in mesh being apparently obtained largely by the sense
of touch. The needle is then passed through the new loop b again from
above and is drawn out leaving a loop c, through which the needle is
passed once more, forming the finished knot, which is then drawn taut.

When netting is made for personal apparel it is generally ornamented
with strips of Dendrobium skin worked in with the thread in the course
of the netting. Netting for personal ornaments consists of a sort of
bag open at both ends. Each end is tied with a string passed through
the ultimate loops, and this string serves to tie the band of net round
the waist or neck or wrist or knee.

Fishing nets are attached to a handle. The handles of the Little
Andaman Division and those of the Great Andaman Division are different
in shape. The Great Andaman net with its hoop can be folded up
compactly for carriage, while that of the Little Andaman cannot.

The nets of rope formerly used in the Great Andaman for catching turtle
have been already described.



DOMESTIC IMPLEMENTS AND UTENSILS.

The Andamanese are perhaps the only people in the world who have no
method of their own of making fire. At the present time they obtain
matches from the Settlement of Port Blair, and a few of them have
learnt, either from Burmese or from Nicobarese, a method of making fire
by the friction of pieces of split bamboo. Formerly, however, they had
no knowledge of any method by which fire could be produced. Fires were
and still are carefully kept alive in the village, and are carefully
carried when travelling. Every hunting party carries its fire with it.
The natives are very skilful in selecting wood that will smoulder for a
long time without going out and without breaking into flame.

The most interesting of the Andamanese domestic utensils is undoubtedly
the cooking-pot. Pots are made in all parts of the Andamans where
suitable clay is to be found. The clay is obtained and is freed as far
as possible from stones and gritty matter with the hands. It is then
moistened with water and kneaded on a board consisting of a portion of
a broken canoe. It is worked very stiff and after kneading is rolled
beneath the palm of the hand into long thin rolls. These are built up
into a pot by coiling, the requisite degree of thickness being obtained
by pressure of the thumb and first finger. When the pot has been built
up to the required size and shape, the surface, inside and out, is
moistened and is scraped over in all directions with an Arca shell. The
pot is dried in the sun for a few hours and is then baked by placing
inside and around it pieces of burning wood. The pot often cracks in
the baking, and another has to be made.

In the North Andaman the pots are made with pointed bottoms, and are
generally small, the largest having a capacity of only six or seven
pints. They are made by women only. In the South Andaman the pots have
rounded bottoms and, on the average, are larger and thicker than those
of the North Andaman. They are made by both men and women, the best
being made by men. In the Little Andaman the pots are larger, and,
particularly, deeper than those of the South Andaman, and have somewhat
pointed bottoms. The pots of the Jarawa are similar to those of the
Little Andaman.

In the North Andaman pots are not ornamented, but in the South Andaman
they are decorated with usually simple patterns of dots and lines made
with a small pointed stick. The Little Andaman pots that I have seen
were not decorated.

The pots are used for cooking, i.e. for boiling meat and vegetables. In
the North Andaman small pots are specially made for melting the
composition used for covering the binding on the heads of arrows.

Neither the Semang nor the Philippine Negritos make any kind of
pottery. The origin of Andamanese pottery therefore is a problem of
some interest. It is almost certain that the early Andamanese were
acquainted with pottery before they were divided into the Great Andaman
and Little Andaman Divisions. One of the very few words which is the
same in all Andamanese languages is the word for pot, buču in the
Little Andaman, buǰ in Aka-Bea and peč in Aka-Jeru. The most reasonable
hypothesis would therefore seem to be that the Andamanese learnt the
method of making pottery by coiling before they reached the Andaman
Islands but after they had become separated from that part of the
Negrito race from which the Semang and the Philippine Negritos are
descended. Of course it is possible that the art of pottery may have
been an original possession of the Negritos and that the Semang and
Philippine Negritos may have lost it. A people could easily lose the
art if they were compelled in the course of their migrations to spend
three or four generations in a region that lacked clay suitable for the
purpose.

The Andamanese make buckets of wood, which they use for carrying and
holding a supply of water. A solid piece is cut from the trunk of a
soft-wooded tree and is hollowed out with a chisel made by attaching
the blade of an adze to a stick. The natural form of the wood is
retained, only the bark being removed from the outside while the inside
is chiselled out to leave sides of about a centimetre thick and a
bottom of somewhat greater thickness. In order to render the bottom of
the bucket water-tight the natives of the Little Andaman pour over it
on the inside melted bees’-wax. The natives of the Great Andaman use
for this purpose the same composition with which they cover the
bindings of their arrows, which certainly is superior to bees’-wax.

A bucket of the shape used in the Great Andaman is shown in Plate VII,
on the left. A strip of cane is attached round the middle of the
bucket, and to this in turn is attached another strip of cane which,
being passed across the front of the chest, enables the bucket to be
carried on the back.

The buckets of the Little Andaman are cut with thinner sides than those
of the Great Andaman. A strip of cane is fastened round the bucket near
the top. From this two other strips of cane are attached by both ends,
passing under the bottom, and a third strip is attached which passes
over the head and supports the bucket when it is carried on the back.
In the Little Andaman the outside of the bucket is charred with fire.

Occasionally pieces of the giant bamboo, which does not grow in the
Andamans, are found on the shore, having drifted from the Burma coast.
When a sound piece is found it is made into buckets each formed of a
single joint.

Water vessels are made from bamboos that do grow in the islands. A
length of bamboo of good diameter is cut, containing three joints. The
partition of the lowest node is preserved to serve as a bottom, and the
other partitions are broken through with an arrow. This is the usual
vessel used for carrying water on a journey by land or in a canoe, and
for keeping a supply of drinking water in the hut.

A single joint of the same kind of bamboo is used as a cooking vessel.
It is cleaned, washed, and dried, and is then filled with meat tightly
packed. The top is closed with leaves and the bamboo is placed on the
fire until the meat is cooked. Meat is not cooked in this way for
immediate consumption. It will keep for twenty-four hours or even
longer if not opened. To obtain the contents the bamboo is split open
with an adze.

Trays used for food are cut from soft wood of a species of Sterculia
with an adze. They are shallow and somewhat long and narrow, with
pointed ends.

A large Pinna shell is occasionally used as a tray or dish for holding
food, or for mixing clay with water for painting. A Nautilus shell
forms a fairly convenient cup or drinking vessel and is frequently used
for that purpose, as well as for baling out water from a canoe.

Bamboo tongs are made by bending double a piece split from a bamboo,
and cutting the ends to the required shape. They are used for lifting
from the fire anything too hot to be taken in the hand and are chiefly
of service in cooking.

Digging sticks are made from various kinds of wood, being simply
pointed at one or both ends. These sticks are not as a rule preserved,
but made as required with an adze and thrown away after use. They are
used for digging up edible roots.

Hooks for picking fruit, such as the Artocarpus, are made by attaching
a small piece of wood to the end of a bamboo. Hooks for catching crabs
are made from the wood of the Rhizophora by taking advantage of the
natural form where a small branch joins a larger one.

The fan-shaped leaf of a Licuala palm is made use of in many ways. The
edges of the leaflets are sewn together with fine strips of cane, and
the sewn leaf is then used either as a sunshade or umbrella for
protection from sunshine or rain, as a sleeping mat if the proper
article be lacking, as a screen to make the roof or sides of a hut more
wind or rain proof, as a wrapper for making objects of all sorts into
bundles, and as a winding sheet for a corpse.

Torches are made from resin, which is broken into small pieces and
wrapped up in leaves of a species of Crinum (? lorifolium), a few
pieces of smouldering charcoal being added before it is tied up. The
torch is then parcelled by marling with a strip of cane or a length of
some tough creeper. These resin torches are used in turtle-hunting and
fishing expeditions on dark nights.

Other torches are made of fragments of rotten Dipterocarpus wood. They
are used only in the village.



PERSONAL ORNAMENT; GREAT ANDAMAN.

At the present time the natives of the Great Andaman Division obtain
from the Settlement of Port Blair cloth which both men and women wear
round the loins. They also obtain beads from which they make necklaces.

The following is a list of the various personal ornaments made by the
natives of the Great Andaman Division, and worn by them.

Rope girdle. Every man wears some sort of girdle round his waist, and
this was formerly the only object that was constantly worn by men. The
girdle may consist of a length of rope of Hibiscus fibre or a length of
ornamental cord made by wrapping the yellow skin of the Dendrobium over
two strands of Hibiscus fibre and then twisting these into a two-ply
cord.

Necklaces and garters of string. Both men and women are often to be
seen with a simple piece of string, usually of Anadendron fibre, tied
round the neck or around the leg just below the knee.

Ornaments of Pandanus leaf. Every married woman always wears a belt of
Pandanus leaf which she is never without for even a moment. When the
belt she is wearing needs renewing she puts the new one on before
taking the other off. To make such a belt two leaves of the Pandanus
Andamanensium are taken and cut to a sufficient length (about 20 cm.).
The thorns at the edge of the leaf are removed by cutting off a strip
of about 3 mm. wide from the edge, leaving a strip of leaf about 4 cm.
broad. The two leaves are placed one on the other and are wound
spirally round in three turns so as to give a belt of six thicknesses
of leaf, the upper surface of the leaf being on the outside of the
belt. The leaves are secured together by tying with thread at the back
where the two ends just overlap. At the point where the leaves are tied
one or two bundles of strips of Pandanus leaf are attached with thread.
The bundle is made of a number of strips of leaf about 90 cm. long and
2·5 cm. broad which are chewed in the mouth to make them soft and then
placed together and served over with thread for about 12 cm. in the
middle. Belts of this kind are generally worn by married women, but
precisely similar belts are worn by men on certain ceremonial
occasions. They are called toto t’er-bua in Aka-Jeru.

A very similar belt is made in exactly the same way save that the
tassel of leaves at the back consists of narrow strips of Pandanus leaf
instead of broad strips. This kind of belt is worn by women only.
Examples may be seen in Plate IV (the lower belt of the two) and in
Plate XVIII. It is called toto t’er-nyarab in Aka-Jeru.

A belt is made in much the same way out of Pandanus leaves split in
half down the midrib, giving strips of about 2·5 cm. broad. Such belts
have only a scanty tassel of thin strips of leaf at the back. They are
worn by girls and women only. They are called kudu in Aka-Jeru.

Yet another variety of belt is made of whole leaves in exactly the same
way as the toto t’er-bua but has no tassel at the back. An example may
be seen in Plate IV (the upper belt). It is worn by women.

Girdles are made of strips of Pandanus leaf of about 1·25 cm. broad
without any tassel, but with strings of Dentalium shell attached at
various points. A girdle of this kind is shown in Plate XV.

Girdles are also made by cutting a number of strips of leaf and
softening them by chewing them in the mouth. These strips are laid
together and either served over or marled with thread so as to make a
girdle of round section. A tassel of leaves similar to that of the toto
t’er-bua is attached to the back, and very frequently strings of
Dentalium shell are attached at various points. Such a girdle may be
worn by either men or women. It is called toto t’er-ŋau in Aka-Jeru.

Yet another kind of girdle is made by splitting Pandanus leaves into
thin strips and making them into a kind of wrapped cord, one strip
being wrapped spirally round one or more others by the same technique
as that used in making bow-strings. A number of coils of strands made
in this way are tied together with thread at various points and a
tassel similar to that of the toto t’er-bua is added at the back. Such
girdles are usually improved by the addition of a few pendent strings
of Dentalium shell. They may be worn by either men or women. Their name
in Aka-Jeru is toto t’er-mo̱i.

Ornaments of Pandanus leaf to be worn either round the leg just below
the knee or round the wrist are made in exactly the same way as the
belt called toto t’er-bua, each having a tassel of Pandanus leaf strips
attached. Such garters and bracelets are worn at a dance by men.

Other ornaments for wearing round the wrist or knee when dancing are
made by the same method as the girdle called toto t’er-ŋau, each having
a tassel of strips of leaf.

Similar dancing ornaments are made by plaiting strips of leaf into a
three-plait cord of the right length, a tassel of loose leaf strips
being left at each end. These are tied round the wrist or knee.

Ornaments for the knee or wrist, such as those shown on the legs of the
man in Plate XII, are made by winding spirally a narrow strip of leaf
and sewing it. A number of pendent strings of Dentalium shell are
attached round it, and often strings are attached at the end of which
small shells hang suspended which rattle against one another as the
wearer walks or dances.

Chaplets or headdresses worn by men when dancing, and occasionally by
women, are made of fairly broad strips of leaf in the same way as the
toto t’er-bua. Such a chaplet may have a tassel of narrow strips of
Pandanus leaf at the back to which are attached shells that rattle as
the wearer moves, or it may have pendent strings of Dentalium shells
round the hinder half of its circumference.

In making ornaments of Pandanus leaf such as the toto t’er-bua the
upper surface of the strip of leaf is usually ornamented with a design
scratched on it with a pointed piece of wood. The design usually covers
not only the portion of leaf that is visible when the belt or other
object is finished, but also that portion which is not visible, being
underneath. Many ornaments of this kind are further decorated when
finished with the composition used for covering the bindings of arrows,
which is applied with a pointed stick in simple geometrical patterns.
The woman shown in Plate X is wearing two belts that have been
ornamented with composition in this way.

Woman’s leaf apron. In the South Andaman the women wear a sort of small
apron consisting of a number of leaves of the Mimusops littoralis laid
one over the other, the stalk ends of the leaves being tucked in
between the layers of a belt of Pandanus leaf. The leaves thus hang
suspended so as to cover, somewhat inadequately, the pudenda. The
natives say that the leaves of the Mimusops are chosen because they
remain green longer than those of any other species. As soon as the
leaves fade and turn yellow they are renewed. The appearance of the
leaf apron may be seen in Plates IV and XV.

The women of the North Andaman have within recent years adopted the
fashion of those of the South Andaman in this matter, but formerly they
made a similar use of a different kind of leaf from a plant called
čainyo in Aka-Jeru, and over the top of the leaves they wore a tassel
of the fibre called ko̱ro.

Ornaments of netting and Dentalium shells. Bands of netting (in shape
of a cylinder or bag open at both ends) are made of suitable size to
tie round the waist, the neck, the leg below the knee or the wrist.
Such netting is generally ornamented as it is being made with strips of
Dendrobium skin worked in the net. Along the lower edge of the band of
netting are attached a number of threads each having Dentalium shells
strung on to it like beads. Ornaments of this kind are shown in Plates
V and IX. They are worn by both men and women, but usually only on the
occasion of a dance or some other ceremony.

Ornaments of bone, etc. These are made with human bones, with the bones
of such animals as pig, turtle, dugong, Paradoxurus, monitor lizard, or
with pieces of wood or cane, or of coral, of suitable shape. A length
of cord, of the fibre of the Hibiscus tiliaceus or of the Ficus
laccifera, is taken, and the bones are attached to it by thread. As a
rule, strips of Dendrobium skin are worked in, being laid on the bone
and bound over with the thread.

Ornaments of shell. Various kinds of shells are perforated and attached
to string and are worn round the neck, the head, the knee, or the
wrist. A necklace of fresh-water shells (ino ko̱lo to̱i in Aka-Jeru) is
shown in Plate IX. A necklace of small sea-shells is shown in Plate
XIII. The favourite shell of the Great Andaman tribes is the Dentalium
octogonum. The shells are collected from the shore by the women. The
closed end of each is bitten off with the teeth and the shells, which
thus form cylindrical beads, are strung on to a piece of thread. These
strings of shell are worn as necklaces, as shown in Plates IV and XII,
and are tied round the wrist and knee and ankle as shown in Plate IV.

Ornaments of seed. The seed-tops of two or three species of mangrove
are collected and strung on to thread and worn round the neck. Fig. 40
shows the two kinds of mangrove seed commonly used in this way.

Bamboo necklaces. A necklace is sometimes made of a number of short
pieces of bamboo arrow-shaft threaded on to a string. The pieces of
bamboo are ornamented with simple designs scratched or cut on them with
a shell.

Sling of bark. Another object that may perhaps be mentioned amongst
objects of personal ornament is the sling used in carrying children. It
is made of a broad strip of the bark of the Hibiscus tiliaceus. Some
slings are covered entirely with netting, while others are ornamented
with shells in various ways. Plate XIV shows one with strings of
Dentalium shell sewn on to it.

Dancing ornaments of Tetranthera wood. A piece of Tetranthera wood,
usually part of the shaft of an old pig-arrow, about 30 to 35 cm. long,
is taken and made into shavings with a Cyrena shell. The wood is shaved
carefully round and round, so as to make a continuous sheet of fibre,
as though unwinding a roll of material. A bundle of these shavings is
tied at one end and covered with red paint, and forms an object that is
carried in the hand or worn in the belt at dances.



PERSONAL ORNAMENT; LITTLE ANDAMAN.

The personal ornaments of the Little Andaman and of the Jarawa are
different from those of the Great Andaman Division, and therefore need
to be described separately.

Ornaments of bark. Strips of bark (? Celtis cinnamonea) are worn by the
men round the waist and round the arm.

Ornamental cord. These are the ornaments most frequently met with both
in the Little Andaman and amongst the Jarawa. The basis is a strip of
cane, varying in breadth in different examples. On one side of this are
laid strips of the yellow skin of the Dendrobium, varying in number
according to the breadth of the cane, and the whole is served over or
bound with thread. The technique in shown in Fig. 41, which represents
diagrammatically the method adopted when there are two strips of
Dendrobium skin. Such ornamental cord is made in pieces of considerable
length. Often tassels of thread (of Ficus hispida fibre) are attached
to it at intervals. The cord is worn wound round the waist, the neck,
or the arm. Both men and women wear it.

Woman’s girdle. In the Little Andaman this is made of a number of fine
strips of cane tied together with thread. At the front is attached a
tassel of fibre made from young unopened palm-leaves (the fibre called
ko̱ro in Aka-Jeru).

Woman’s shoulder strap. The women of the Little Andaman wear a strip of
bark over the shoulders, crossing over the chest and passing beneath
the breasts.

The above brief description of the ornaments of the Andamanese is
perhaps sufficient for the purpose of this appendix, which is to
determine as far as possible the elements of a primitive Negrito
culture. Any complete account of the subject would need a large number
of figures and a discussion of many comparatively unimportant details.
The first point of importance to be noted is that the personal
ornaments of the Little Andaman Division differ markedly from those of
the Great Andaman Division. One difference is that the Pandanus leaf,
which is used so much and in so many ways in the Great Andaman, seems
not to be used at all in the Little Andaman. Another is that shells,
which are much used in the Great Andaman, are used to a far less extent
in the Little Andaman. The natives of the Little Andaman told me that
they sometimes make ornaments of Dentalium shell, but I did not see any
such ornament, nor any other ornament of shell, in use. The ornaments
of netting worn in the Great Andaman, and forming the usual dancing
costume, seem not to be used in the Little Andaman. Finally, perhaps
most important of all, there is at present no evidence that the natives
of the Little Andaman make ornaments of either human or animal bones.
In the Little Andaman the lower jaw of a child is preserved by the
parents and is worn by them, but I never saw a human skull (whether of
child or adult) so worn, and I was not able to obtain any evidence of
the use of strings of human bones such as are constantly seen in a camp
of the Great Andaman.

The points of similarity between the ornaments of the Little Andaman
and those of the Great Andaman are very few. One of the most striking
is the great use that is made in both divisions of the yellow skin of
the Dendrobium. It seems probable that here we have evidence of one
element of a primitive Negrito culture, for the Negritos of the
Philippines also are fond of using a yellow vegetable fibre for their
personal ornaments. So far as it is possible to judge from the figure
and description, the armlet given by Meyer in Plate iii, No. 11, seems
to be very similar to the ornamental cord of the Little Andaman. It is
described as a “mit schwarz und gelben Grasstreifchen umflocktener
Bambus-reif.”

Another point of resemblance between the Great Andaman and the Little
Andaman is that in both very little use is made of feathers or flowers.
The natives of the Great Andaman never make use of the feathers of
birds. The Jarawa occasionally wear in a chaplet a feather of the
king-crow (Dicrurus macrocercus) if we may judge from a specimen in the
British Museum. The natives of the Little Andaman certainly do not as a
rule make any use of feathers. It would seem, from all accounts, that
the Semang and the Philippine Negritos do not make any considerable use
of feathers for personal ornament. We may perhaps hazard the conclusion
that this is a mark of the Negrito culture distinguishing them from
such people as the Papuans or Australians in whose personal ornaments
the feathers of birds occupy an important place.

In the Great Andaman flowers are not used as personal ornaments. In the
British Museum there is an ornament from the Little Andaman consisting
of a strip of bark-fibre with a few flowers attached.

As regards personal ornament, therefore, the only elements of a
primitive Negrito culture that we seem to be able to trace in the
Andamans at the present day are (1) the use of yellow vegetable fibre,
and (2) the absence of any considerable use of feathers.

One element of a primitive Andamanese culture, though not necessarily
of a primitive Negrito culture, would seem to be the use of a tassel of
the fibre obtained from an unopened palm-leaf which is used by women to
cover their genitals in the Little Andaman, and was similarly used
until recently in the North Andaman.



HAIR-DRESSING, SCARIFICATION, AND BODY-PAINTING.

At the present time the usual method of hair-dressing in the Great
Andaman is to shave a portion of the scalp all round so as to leave a
sort of skull-cap of hair, as may be seen in many of the plates of this
volume. In some cases a “parting” is made by shaving a narrow strip
over the crown. (See Plate XV, for example.) When the hair grows so
long as to be uncomfortable the whole head is shaved, and it is then
permitted to grow again. In these days the natives cut their hair
whenever they have an opportunity of obtaining a pair of scissors. In
the Little Andaman women and old men are frequently to be seen with the
head entirely shaved. The younger men shave away the lower edge of the
hair all round in the same way as the natives of the Great Andaman, but
this may be a recent practice.

The fashion of hair-dressing, at any rate for women, has changed within
recent times, for Mr Man wrote in 1882 that “the majority of the women
every week or ten days shave their heads almost entirely, leaving only
two narrow parallel lines of hair, termed gor, from the crown to the
nape of the neck [256].” At the present time this style of
hair-dressing has fallen entirely into disuse, and the women do their
hair in the same way as the men.

The operation of shaving, which is done with a flake of glass or
quartz, is performed by women, and never, or very rarely, by men.

Mention has been made in an earlier part of the work of the way in
which the natives of the Great Andaman scarify the skin of the body and
limbs with a flake of glass or quartz. The Semang do not scarify
themselves in this way, but some, at any rate, of the Negritos of the
Philippines do.

The natives of the Great Andaman, as described earlier in this work,
paint their bodies with a grey clay called odu or og, with a fine white
clay, and with red paint made by mixing burnt oxide of iron with fat or
oil. The natives of the Little Andaman use the same kind of clay as
that called odu or og in the Great Andaman, but instead of applying it
in patterns they smear it roughly on the back and front of the trunk.
They also use red paint, with which they smear their hair, a practice
never met with in the Great Andaman.



ORNAMENTATION.

The Andamanese have simple designs which they paint or incise on their
bodies and on a great number of the objects that they make and use. A
few typical designs such as are incised or painted on belts of Pandanus
leaf are shown in Fig. 42. A very large number of designs are based on
the zig-zag line. Examples are shown in Fig. 42 c, e, and g. In all
parts of the Great Andaman and also in the Little Andaman the zig-zag
line is associated with snakes. Thus in the Little Andaman the simple
zig-zag line is called dobo kwolage (dobo = snake). In the North
Andaman the design of zig-zag lines painted on the body with white clay
is called or-čubi t’era-bat, or-čubi being the name of a species of
large snake.

A number of other common designs consist of parallel lines of dots or
of short strokes, an example of which is shown in Fig. 42 f.

By far the greater number of the Andamanese designs are based on the
following elements, (1) parallel lines crossing a surface from side to
side at right angles to the edge or else in a sloping direction (about
45°), (2) parallel lines of dots or of short lines, i.e. parallel
broken lines, as in Fig. 42 f, (3) zig-zag lines, which may be single,
or parallel or opposed so as to make lines of lozenges. As an example
of the way in which these elements may be combined two designs copied
from bamboo necklaces are shown in Fig. 43.

It would perhaps be possible to show that there is a real connection
between the ornamentation of the Andamanese and that of the Semang, as
there is certainly a considerable degree of superficial resemblance,
but at present we understand so little the psychological processes
underlying the use of ornament amongst primitive peoples that the
subject is one of considerable difficulty.



CANOES.

Canoes are in regular use on the coast in all parts of the islands.
There are three types of canoe. (1) The Little Andaman canoe, with one
outrigger, propelled with paddles or with a pole. (2) The Great Andaman
small canoe, with one outrigger, propelled with paddles or with a pole.
(3) The Great Andaman large canoe, without outrigger, propelled with
oars.

The third kind of canoe mentioned above is a recent innovation. The
natives themselves say that such canoes have only been made in recent
times, since they have been able to obtain a plentiful supply of iron
tools, and so have been able to cut down and hollow out large trunks
[257]. They seem to have been invented by the natives of the South
Andaman, and copied by those of the Middle and North Andaman.

Canoes of this type are propelled by rowing with short oars, except in
shallow water where they are poled. This method of propulsion (rowing
as opposed to paddling) was adopted in imitation of the boats with
which they have become familiar since the European occupation.

For the small canoe of the Great Andaman five or six species of
soft-wooded trees are used, of which three are species of Sterculia. A
suitable tree is selected near the shore or a creek, and is felled.
Care is taken to make it fall in a particular direction. Thus, if the
trunk is curved, the convex side of the curve will have to be the
bottom of the canoe, and the tree should fall so that this side lies on
the ground. Trees are very rarely regular and before beginning the work
of cutting the natives have to decide how it should be cut so as to
give the best result, i.e., the greatest stability.

After the tree is felled the trunk is cut to the requisite length. The
inside of the canoe is first roughly hollowed out with the adze, no use
being made of fire. The bark is then removed from the outside of the
trunk and the two ends are shaped. Finally, the inside is carefully
finished with the adze so as to reduce the sides and bottom to the
requisite thickness.

Except at the stem and stern, the canoe retains the shape of the tree,
only the bark being removed, and the sides and bottom being formed of
the alburnum or sap-wood. At the stern a small platform is cut
projecting over the water, which serves as a seat for the steersman. At
the prow a larger platform is cut, on which the harpooner stands when
he is harpooning turtle or fish. Below these two platforms the ends are
not cut away squarely but are rounded from side to side. The prow of
the canoe is in every case the lower and therefore broader end of the
trunk. It is only in this way that a sufficiently large platform can be
provided for the harpooner.

The trees used for canoes have a pithy core and there is therefore a
small patch in both the prow and the stern which would admit the water.
In former times these two places were caulked with bees’-wax. At the
present time the natives often nail a piece of tin (part of an old
kerosene tin, for example), with some rags beneath it, on the outside
of the canoe at these two places.

When the hull of the canoe is finished it is moved to the shore or to
the bank of a creek and the outrigger is attached. The float is a
straight spar of light wood. In the North Andaman the wood of the
Hibiscus tiliaceus is often used, but Mr Man says that in the South
Andaman the float is always made from a species of Sterculia (mai in
Aka-Bea) [258]. The ends of the float are only roughly shaped. The
broader end of the float is forward.

The float is attached to a number of booms, of which there are never
less than three in the smallest canoes, while there may be as many as
eight or nine in a large canoe. A medium-sized canoe has five or six
booms. The boom is a thin straight piece of tough wood, of which one
end is sharpened and thrust right through two holes cut in the gunwales
of the canoe opposite to one another, the sharpened end projecting for
a few inches on the port side of the canoe. The boom thus projects
about three feet on the starboard side on the level of the gunwale.

Where the boom passes through the gunwales of the canoe it is bound
with cane, and the cane is bound round the whole of that part of the
boom that is within the canoe between the two gunwales. (See Fig. 44.)
This portion of the boom forms a seat for the man paddling the canoe,
so that he sits on a level with the gunwale with his feet on the floor
of the canoe.

The boom is attached to the float by means of sticks of tough wood.
These sticks, having pointed ends, are driven into the float, one
perpendicular, and the other two at an angle on each side. The tops of
the three sticks are fastened to the boom a few inches from its end by
means of a strip of cane. The arrangement of the three sticks is shown
in Fig. 45.

The strip of cane with which the sticks are bound to the boom is wound
spirally round the boom itself for a few inches and is then carried
down round the float and back to the boom again on the other side. The
three sticks provide an efficient resistance against a longitudinal
thrust (i.e., a thrust in the same direction as the line of the canoe).
The strip of cane passing from the boom round the float and back to the
boom again provides a resistance against any lateral thrust on the
float. The three sticks, being driven in when the wood of the float is
dry, do not readily work loose, as the water in which it is constantly
immersed keeps the wood swollen. The cane binding, including the stays
on each side, may work loose, but can readily be tightened or renewed.
Each of the booms is attached to the float in exactly the same way, and
the whole arrangement is very efficient in keeping the float rigidly
attached to the hull in such a position that it rests on the surface of
the water when the hull itself rides freely balanced.

Canoes of this type vary in dimensions within wide limits. A small
canoe with only three booms, which would carry three persons, measured
4·85 metres in length over all with a beam of about 35 centimetres. A
large canoe may measure as much as 9 metres with a proportionate beam.

A well-made canoe will often balance well enough as it stands, but it
is sometimes necessary to balance it with ballast of stones or pieces
of coral. In any case the canoe is easily overturned in a rough sea
unless the occupants can maintain the balance with their bodies. As the
canoe is made of light wood it cannot sink even when full of water, and
the natives easily right an overturned canoe, bale it out, and get in
again, even in a rough sea.

The furniture of a canoe consists of the ballast (of stone), a piece of
stone (or sometimes a piece of tin) on which to keep a small fire
smouldering, an anchor consisting of a lump of coral or stone attached
to a length of rope, a Nautilus shell or two for baling out the canoe,
a bamboo pole of about 18 feet in length for poling the canoe in
shallow water, and paddles.

In the platform overhanging the prow a few holes are cut. These holes
are sometimes used to attach the rope by which the canoe is fastened to
an anchor. One or more turtle skulls are often attached so as to hang
down beneath the platform. In turtle-hunting expeditions on dark nights
a torch is slung beneath the forward platform so as to shed its light
on the water while the harpooner remains in shadow.

When a canoe is finished it is decorated with designs painted on it
with red paint and white clay, particularly on the forward platform and
along the gunwale. These designs soon wear off when the canoe is in use
and are not renewed.

The paddles used by the Andamanese vary considerably in size and to
some extent in shape, but the following description with its
accompanying figure gives a fair idea of a typical specimen. The whole
paddle has a length of 123·5 centimetres, the shaft being 85
centimetres and the blade 38·5 centimetres. The diameter of the shaft
from the blade to the middle is 2·6 centimetres, and from the middle
towards the handle end it tapers to a point. The shaft is circular in
section throughout its length. The blade is leaf-shaped, pointed
bluntly at the apex. In section it is plano-convex, with a maximum
thickness of 1·3 centimetres and a width of 8·7 centimetres. Paddles
are cut with an adze from the wood of the Myristica longifolia and
planed with a boar’s tusk. They are often ornamented, when new, with
painted designs in red and white.

In deep water the canoe is paddled. Each of the occupants sits facing
forward. The steersman sits on the stern platform. The others sit on
the seats provided by the outrigger booms. Each man paddles on which
side he chooses. It rests with the steersman to maintain the canoe in
its proper course. In shallow water the canoe is propelled with a pole.
A man stands on the forward platform and poles the canoe, steering as
he does so. In a fairly large canoe a man at the stern may also take a
pole and, standing up, help to propel the canoe.

All the work connected with the making of canoes and paddles is done by
men alone, except the painting, which is usually done by women. It is
the men also who make most use of canoes.

The large canoe, that is now made by all the tribes of the Great
Andaman Division, is simply a canoe of the same general shape as the
Great Andaman outrigger canoe, cut from a larger tree and without the
outrigger. The shape of the hull, with its platforms fore and aft, is
exactly the same. It seems that when the natives obtained a plentiful
supply of iron tools (after 1858) they began to cut down and hollow out
larger trees than formerly. Having made these larger canoes they found
that they would, when well cut and ballasted with stone, float quite
well without an outrigger. (It may be mentioned that the hull of a
small canoe is always tested on the water before the outrigger is
attached.) Indeed a well cut canoe of large size floats and balances
better in a rough sea than a smaller one with an outrigger. It is
possible that at first these large canoes were propelled with paddles
just as the outrigger canoes are, the paddlers facing forward. Having
learnt to understand the principle of the oar, through their contact
with the Penal Settlement, the natives applied this principle to their
own canoes. It could not, of course, be applied to the small canoes, as
the shape of the canoe and the position of the paddler make the use of
an oar impossible. It could be applied very easily, however, to the new
large canoes. In these the oarsman does not sit on a level with the
gunwale, but sits down in the hull itself on a piece of wood resting on
the two sides of the hull a few inches above the floor. The gunwale of
the canoe is thus about on a level with the bottom of his sternum. A
number of holes are made in the gunwale on each side, and by means of
these, loops of cane are attached to the gunwale. The oar, which is
shaped in imitation of European oars, but with a short shaft, is thrust
through the loop of cane, which serves as a fulcrum or rowlock. The
rowers face aft. A man at the stern steers with a paddle. In shallow
water the large canoes are propelled with poles in exactly the same way
as the smaller canoes.

In the bow, at about the position that would be occupied by the
foremost boom in an outrigger canoe, holes are made in the gunwale on
each side and a piece of wood is thrust through them as a sort of
thwart. This is to provide a means of making fast the end of the
harpoon line or the anchor line, and thus serves a purpose that is
served by the foremost boom in the outrigger canoe.

The large canoes are not quite so useful in turtle-hunting as the
smaller outrigger variety, as they cannot be so quickly turned when the
pursued turtle doubles. Very often a large canoe and a small canoe are
taken together on an expedition, the harpooning being mostly done from
the smaller one while the captured turtles are placed in the larger
one. A small canoe with three or four men cannot hold more than one or
at most two big turtles, whereas as many as ten or a dozen can be
stowed in one of the large canoes.

The chief use of the large canoes is to make journeys from place to
place. One of the largest will hold as many as thirty men and women
with their baggage, whereas an outrigger canoe would never carry more
than nine or ten. Further, there is less chance of an even heavily
laden big canoe capsizing in a rough sea than of an outrigger canoe
doing so. One result of the introduction of the large canoe has
therefore been to enable the natives to move much more freely about the
islands than formerly. The passage from the South Andaman to Ritchie’s
Archipelago, for instance, would only be attempted in an outrigger
canoe on a very calm day, whereas in a large canoe it can be
successfully accomplished even when there is something of a sea
running.

The small canoe of the Little Andaman is fairly similar to that of the
Great Andaman. There are three differences. (1) The stem and stern are
squarely cut in the Little Andaman, instead of being rounded off. (2)
The outrigger booms are attached to the top of the gunwale by cane
binding which passes through holes made in the gunwales, instead of
being themselves passed through holes in the gunwale. (3) The float is
attached to the booms in a different and less efficient manner. Three
pointed hard-wood sticks are driven into the float, but they are all
three approximately perpendicular. They are bound at the top to the
boom, but there are no stays of cane to maintain the float rigid
against a lateral thrust. In other respects the Little Andaman canoe is
the same as the Great Andaman canoe.

The Jarawa of the South Andaman do not at the present time make use of
canoes. This is apparently because, through their hostility with the
Aka-Bea, they have been confined to the interior of the island. They
make rafts of bamboos lashed together for crossing creeks and inlets.
The forest-dwellers of the Great Andaman Division seem also to have
made occasional use of similar rafts for the same purpose.

A canoe of the North Sentinel was seen by Mr Gilbert Rogers during a
visit to that island in 1903 [259]. It had been hollowed out of a tree
and was about 15 feet long. The ends of the canoe were cut off
perpendicularly to its length leaving a piece of the tree about one
inch thick projecting for about three inches beyond either end to form
a small but rickety seat. The log from which the canoe was cut was
curved so that the ends were slightly higher than the middle. It had a
float supported by six booms passing through holes cut in the sides of
the canoe. These booms were fastened to smaller pieces of stick fixed
into the sides of the canoe beneath them. The outrigger was attached to
each boom by two small pointed sticks driven into the float and tied to
the boom above with cane. There was one small paddle, a Nautilus shell
for a baler, and five poles resting on the outrigger booms. These point
to the canoe being poled along in the lagoon, which is quite shallow,
rather than to its being used for long journeys or outside the reefs
which surround the island. The canoe was 18 inches in diameter at the
smaller end and perhaps 30 inches wide at the larger end.

This description shows that the canoe of the North Sentinel is on the
whole more like that of the Little Andaman than like that of the Great
Andaman.

It seems probable that the Andaman Islands were peopled by sea from the
coast of Burma. If this were so, then the original ancestors of the
Andamanese must have been in possession of canoes. A consideration of
the present Andaman canoes suggests that their ancestors had canoes
with a single outrigger on the starboard side, with a number of booms.
Of the different methods of attaching the booms to the float, it is
possible that the method now in use in the Little Andaman (and
apparently also in the North Sentinel) is primitive, and that the Great
Andaman attachment is an improvement that has been invented since the
separation of the two divisions. On the other hand it is not impossible
that the Great Andaman attachment is primitive, and that in the Little
Andaman we have a degeneration that might be due to the fact that the
Little Andaman (and equally the North Sentinel) provides much less
scope for maritime pursuits than the Great Andaman.

The recent invention of the large canoe in the Great Andaman and the
adoption of the principle of the oar shows that the Andamanese readily
adopt new inventions when these are clearly of service to them.

Turning now to the Semang, as these people live inland they have no use
for canoes. They make rafts of bamboos lashed together with which they
float down the rivers, returning overland.

Some of the Philippine Negritos seem to live on the coast and possibly
have canoes, but nothing is known about these.



CONCLUSION.

The examination of the technical culture of the Andamanese given above
has been sufficient to enable us to make a few statements as to what
was probably the culture of the Negritos before they were split up into
isolated groups. It is highly probable that they obtained their
subsistence solely by hunting and collecting vegetable products. They
had bows and arrows, the form of bow being probably fairly similar to
that used at the present day in the Little Andaman, while for hunting
the larger animals they had arrows with detachable heads. They possibly
had no knowledge of any way of making implements of stone, but made use
only of such materials as wood, bone, and shell. It is not probable
that they possessed the art of making pottery, and their basketry and
mat-work were probably confined to very simple forms. In their personal
ornaments there is reason to think that they showed a fondness for
bright yellow vegetable fibre, and made little or no use of the
feathers of birds. The ornamentation of their utensils was probably
confined to the use of the simplest forms of geometric design with a
preponderance of the zig-zag and the lozenge. Finally their huts
consisted of a single sloping roof sufficient to afford shelter for a
single family or larger huts consisting of such small huts joined
together.

We have seen that since the Andamanese have occupied their present
home, or at any rate since the Great Andaman Division and the Little
Andaman Division have been separated from one another, many changes,
some of considerable importance, have taken place in the Andaman
technology. In general it would seem that the technical culture of the
Great Andaman has changed more than that of the Little Andaman. Putting
aside the effect on the technology of the introduction of iron, there
is no evidence that any of the changes that have taken place in the
Great Andaman have been due to outside influence. Important
modifications have taken place in the form of the bow, in the forms and
technique of baskets, and in personal ornaments, and in all these
instances there is no reason to think that these changes have not been
brought about by the natives themselves without the influence of
contact with other people. Their method of working iron, based as it
is, to all appearance, on their former method of working shell, shows
that even here, though the iron itself came to them from outside, and
even though they may have learnt its use from seeing it used by aliens,
still they have not learnt from others how to fashion the metal into
shape by heating it. Thus, so far as their technical culture is
concerned, there is no evidence whatever that the Andamanese have ever
been influenced by contact with any other race since the time, now many
centuries ago, when they first reached the islands.

On the other hand there is some probability that the ancestors of the
Andamanese, before they first reached the islands, or at any rate
before the isolation of the Little Andaman from the Great Andaman, had
learnt from some other race how to make pottery, and it is possible
that at the same time they may have acquired other elements of their
culture, such as the outrigger canoe. We may even give a guess as to
the particular culture from which the ancestors of the Andamanese may
have adopted these elements, which may well have been that of a branch
of that people of whom an offshoot peopled the Nicobars.

Confirmation of these hypotheses, if confirmation be ever forthcoming,
can only be obtained in the study of the history of races and of
culture in south-eastern Asia. Until we have much fuller knowledge of
the culture of the Semang and the Negritos of the Philippines, any
conclusions that may be drawn from the study of the Andamanese alone
must be regarded as provisional working hypotheses only, and it is as
such that they are here put forward.








APPENDIX B

THE SPELLING OF ANDAMANESE WORDS


In writing words of the Andaman languages I have used a slightly
modified form of the “Anthropos” Alphabet of Father Schmidt [260],
which I consider to be by far the most scientific alphabet for writing
down the languages of primitive peoples. The consonants are


                       k   g       y   ŋ
                               č   ǰ
                                       ń
                       t   d           n   l   r
                       p   b       w   m


The letter ŋ is used for the nasalised guttural stop (ng in English)
which should always be written with one letter, since it is a single
consonant, quite distinct from the double consonant ng of “ungodly.”
The letter ń stands for a palatalised n, something like the sound in
French “agneau.” The č and ǰ, which, in the “Anthropos” Alphabet
represent the sounds in English “church” and “judge” respectively,
should, I think, really be written t′ and d′. The t′ is a palatalised
t, as heard in “Tuesday,” whereas the č is a fricative, often regarded
as a compound of t and sh. It is not always easy to distinguish t′ from
č and d′ from ǰ, but I believe the Andamanese sounds are really t′ and
d′, and this is to some extent confirmed by the fact that they have no
s, z, sh or zh in their languages. I have used the č and ǰ because
former writers had written these sounds ch and j and it seemed worth
while to make some sacrifice of scientific exactness in order to avoid
too great a divergence in spelling from previous workers in the same
field.

The remaining consonants may be pronounced as in English. I have not
distinguished between different varieties of the consonants l, r, t, d,
k and g. Further I have not distinguished between p and p̌ (the labial
fricative). Many of the words of the Northern languages that I have
written with a p are often pronounced with a p̌ sound.

The vowels are


               i                                    u
                   e                            o       ö
                       e̱                  o̱
                            a̤       a̱̱
                                 a


These may be pronounced as follows:


       i,     intermediate between the vowels of “it” and “eat.”
       e,     as the vowel in “say.”
       e̱,     as the e in “error” or the a in “Mary.”
       a̤,     as the a in “man.”
       a,     as the a in French “pas.”
       a̱̱,     as the a in “path.”
       o̱,     as the vowel in “not” or in “nought.”
       o,     as in “go.”
       u,     as the vowel in “fool.”
       ö,     nearly as the German ö.


I have not attempted to distinguish all the different varieties of
vowel sounds that are found in the different dialects. Slightly
different but closely related sounds are represented by the same letter
[261].

In writing Andamanese words I have followed the practice of separating
by hyphens the affixes from the stems in each word. In the Andamanese
languages there are two main classes of words. The first class consists
of words each of which is a simple stem (without affixes). Such words
are the names of what the Andaman Islander regards as simple
independent objects or things, such as roa, canoe, baraba, a mat, ra, a
pig. The second class consists of words each of which is formed of a
stem and a prefix. In the language of the Little Andaman (and in that
of the Jarawa as far as known) these prefixes are simple vowels, i-,
e-, a-, o-, and u-. In the languages of the Great Andaman Division they
are such as ot-, aka-, era-, e-, u-, ab-, etc. Such words are used to
denote dependent objects such as the parts, qualities or actions of a
thing. Thus while a pig (ra) or a canoe (roa) is an independent object
and is therefore denoted by a simple stem, the head or prow of a pig or
canoe, being a part of a “thing,” is denoted by a word (ot-čo)
consisting of a stem (-čo) and a prefix (ot-). So also the quality of
bigness which may belong to a pig or a canoe is denoted by a word
(er-kuro) consisting of a stem (-kuro) and a prefix (er-).

Thus the second class includes many words that we should call nouns,
all the words we should call adjectives and practically all those we
should regard as verbs. In the Andamanese languages the distinction
between nouns and adjectives is not very clear and even less so is the
distinction between adjectives and verbs. Whereas the distinction
between things (independent objects) on the one hand, and the parts,
qualities, actions, etc. of things on the other, is of the utmost
importance. For this reason I have thought it advisable always to
separate by a hyphen the prefix and the stem in words of the second
class.

In compound words or phrases in which the second word consists of
prefix and stem it is common to insert before the prefix a t or an l.
Thus ra t’er-kuro is “a big pig” and ra t’ot-čo is “a pig’s head.” In
writing such words I have placed an inverted comma between the t or l
and the prefix. This infix t must not be confused with the first
personal pronoun in the North Andaman, Tio, contracted to T’ before a
prefix.








NOTES


[1] “Notes on the Languages of the Andaman Islands,” by A. R. Brown,
Anthropos, Vol. IX, 1914, pp. 36–52 with map. This paper contains notes
on I, The Relations of the Andamanese Languages, and II, The Formation
of Words in the Language of the Little Andaman.

[2] I hope to be able to publish shortly the first volume of a work in
which the same method is applied to the interpretation of the social
institutions of the natives of Australia.

[3] The formation of the Arakan Fold (including the Andaman and Nicobar
Islands), dates from the middle of the Tertiary Period, and was
apparently connected with the great movements that produced the
Himalaya-Alpine mountain system and the Circum-Pacific Fold. The
Andaman Sea, in the later Tertiary period, was prolonged much further
to the north, over the region now occupied by the Pegu Yomah.

[4] This line of volcanic activity is a minor continuation of the Sunda
Range of volcanoes of Java and Sumatra. It is continued northward,
parallel to the Arakan Fold, as far as the extinct volcano of
Puppadoung, east of Pagan, not far from Lat. 21°.

[5] The flora of the Andamans and Cocos contains a number of species,
the presence of which can only be explained by the supposition of a
past land connection with the Arakan region. (See Prain, “The
Vegetation of the Coco Group,” Journ. Asiatic Soc. of Bengal, Vol. LX,
Part II, pp. 283–406.) On the other hand, the paucity of mammalian
fauna is such as to lead to the conclusion that the islands were
isolated at a period when the mammals now typical of the mainland did
not exist there. (See Miller, “Mammals of the Andaman and Nicobar
Islands,” Proc. National Museum, U.S.A. Vol. XXIV).

[6] There is no evidence of the former existence of Negritos in the
Nicobars, but on the other hand, there is equally no direct evidence of
their former presence in Lower Burma.

[7] On the accompanying map of south-eastern Asia the regions now
occupied by the Negritos are shown by the shading.

[8] Anciennes Relations des Indes et de la Chine; De Deux Voyageurs
Mahometans, qui y allerent dans le neuvième siècle; Traduites d’Arabe
(par M. l’Abbé Renaudot). Paris, MDCCXVIII, pp. 5 and 6.

[9] Takakasu’s Edition of I-tsing, pp. xxviii seq.

[10] The Travels of Marco Polo, Edited by John Masefield, Everyman’s
Library, 1908, p. 347.

[11] Extracts of Master Caesar Frederike: his Eighteene Yeeres’ Indian
Observations, Purchas: his Pilgrimes, London, 1625; Vol. II, p. 1710.
In spite of the repeated descriptions of the Andamanese by early
writers as ferocious cannibals, there is good reason to think that they
have not deserved quite so evil a reputation. If they had ever been
cannibals they had certainly abandoned the custom by the time the
islands were occupied in 1858. It is improbable that such inveterate
man-eaters, as they are supposed to have been, would have entirely
altered their ways in the course of a century or two. The legend
probably had its origin in the fact that the Andamanese attacked all
strangers who landed on their coasts, and (in the North Andaman, at any
rate) often disposed of the bodies of slain enemies by cutting them in
pieces and burning them on a fire.

[12] The account is that of a visit to the Andamans in 1771 by John
Ritchie, published in the Indian Antiquary, Vol. XXX, 1901, pp. 232
seq. Two natives came off to the ship in a canoe, and Ritchie writes:
“I gave them some nails and bits of old iron which pleased them much;
and about three in the afternoon, they went into the canoe, and tried
hard to pull the chain plates from the vessel’s side. They went astern
when this would not do, and dragged strongly and long at the rudder
chains; but these were too well fixed; and at last, they went towards
the shore at an easy rate, looking at their nails, and singing all the
way.”

[13] In 1906 some Little Andaman visitors to Rutland Island captured a
Jarawa of that part. They told me that though he spoke differently from
them, they could understand him fairly well.

[14] Portman, M. V., A History of Our Relations with the Andamanese,
Calcutta, 1899.

[15] This estimate is based on what the Andamanese were able to tell me
of the conditions under which they formerly lived. Of course such an
estimate can only be of small value. I think it is more probable that I
have underestimated the former population than that I have
overestimated it.

[16] Notes on the Languages of the South Andaman Group of Tribes, p.
27.

[17] Page 18 above.

[18] A few small areas were not occupied at all, for example the
greater part of Saddle Peak in the North Andaman, which is covered with
dense jungle and is supposed by the natives to be the haunt of large
and deadly snakes and of evil spirits.

[19] Mouat, F. J., Adventures and Researches among the Andaman
Islanders, London, 1863, p. 313.

[20] Loc. cit. p. 300.

[21] Journ. Anthrop. Inst. Vol. XII, pp. 107 and 108.

[22] Portman, Notes on the Languages of the South Andaman Group of
Tribes, p. 23.

[23] The photograph is reproduced in Le Tour du Monde, 1895, p. 447.

[24] See Journ. Anthrop. Inst. Vol. XII, p. 71.

[25] Man, op. cit. p. 108.

[26] In the North Andaman the times before the Settlement are spoken of
as the time when there were no dogs, Bibi poiye = “Dog not.”

[27] They are only eaten in the rainy season.

[28] There are two kinds of wild bee in the Andamans. A small species
makes black honeycombs in hollow trees, and these may be found at any
time of the year. A larger species of bee builds white combs suspended
from the underside of branches in tall trees. Such combs are found in
abundance only in the hot season, and not at all in the middle of the
rainy season.

[29] Man, in Journ. Anthrop. Inst. Vol. XII, p. 108.

[30] The natives of the North Andaman were able to tell me of a few
cases of murder which had occurred within the memory of those still
living.

Mr Portman in his History of Our Relations with the Andamanese records
a certain number of murders which occurred while he was in charge of
the Andamanese. One man, who had been imprisoned at Port Blair for
murder, committed another soon after his release and was hanged. Since
that date there has been no case of murder among the Great Andaman
tribes. This is perhaps in part due to the punishment with which they
are now threatened by the Government, but another cause is probably the
breakdown of the old social organisation which has in this respect
rather improved their morals than the opposite.

[31] The nickname is applied, however, not only to those who deserve it
by their character, but also to others; for instance, one man was
called Tarenǰek because his maternal uncle was a man of violent temper.

[32] See below, Chap. IV.

[33] The classificatory system of relationship was first studied and
named by Lewis H. Morgan, in Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity of
the Human Family, Washington, Smithsonian Institution, 1871. The
subject is also discussed in the same author’s Ancient Society.
Although there has been a good deal of attention paid to the systems of
relationship of savage tribes since the time of Morgan, there is no
general work on the subject that supersedes these two books.

[34] The terms used in any society to denote relationships are of
interest to the ethnologist as an important means to the discovery of
the relationship system (i.e. the system of juridical and moral
institutions) existing in the same society. Without a thorough
knowledge of the terms in use and their exact meanings it is impossible
to discover the rights and duties of relatives one to another. It is,
however, sometimes forgotten that the study of terms of relationship is
not an end in itself but a means to a more important study.

[35] In the Andamanese languages a large number of words are formed
from a stem and a prefix. E-, ot-, aka-, ara-, ab- etc. are prefixes of
this kind. The function of the prefixes is (1) to show that the object
denoted by the word is in a dependent relation to some other object
understood, as for instance that it is part of that other object, and
(2) to modify the reference of the stem, as for instance while e-tire
means the offspring of an animal or an human being, era-tire means the
offspring of a tree or plant (the young shoots). For a description of
these prefixes the reader may be referred to the work of Mr Portman,
Notes on the Languages of the South Andaman Group of Tribes.

[36] Dege bula and dege pal mean “my husband” and “my wife”
respectively.

[37] Notes on the Languages of the South Andaman Group of Tribes.

[38] Man, op. cit. p. 421. The dia, or the d’ before a prefix, in the
words of this list is the pronoun “my.”

[39] Portman, Notes on the Languages of the South Andaman Group of
Tribes, p. 255.

[40] Op. cit. p. 100.

[41] The natives commonly applied the term to me, in the form Mam-jula.

[42] The systems of relationship of savage peoples are often very
difficult to study, even with a thorough mastery of the native
language. My account of the Andamanese system is not perhaps complete
and is therefore open to error. Since the above account was written I
have had the opportunity of studying in Australia several examples of
“classificatory” systems of relationship, and can now say very
definitely that such a system presents an extreme contrast to the
system of the Andamans. My failure fully to comprehend the Andamanese
system was partly due to the difficulties of the language, in which I
did not have time to become expert, and partly to the nature of the
Andamanese terms, of which it is by no means easy to discover the
meaning, even with careful observation.

[43] Man, op. cit. p. 135. He speaks of the wives as “models of
constancy.”

[44] I collected a number of genealogies from the natives, but
unfortunately my own inexperience in the use of the genealogical
method, and my consequent inability to surmount the difficulties with
which I met, made this branch of my investigations a failure.

[45] When a husband and wife greet one another the man sits on the lap
of the wife.

[46] Man, op. cit. p. 139.

[47] Ibid.

[48] Man, op. cit. p. 139.

[49] Man, op. cit. p. 125.

[50] It would not be safe, however, to base any arguments of importance
to sociology on the above description of the Andamanese system of
relationship alone. Although I tried to learn all that I could on the
subject, it is quite certain that I did not learn all that was to be
learnt, and it is possible that further enquiry might have shown that I
was mistaken in some of my observations. The difficulty of being really
sure on these matters is due (1) to the fact that the breaking-up of
the old local organisation has produced many changes in their customs,
and (2) to the difficulty of questioning the natives on matters
connected with relationships when they have no words in their language
to denote any but the simplest relationships.

[51] The dance is described in the next chapter.

[52] In the years 1872 to 1902 inclusive the Jarawa made eight attacks
on camps of the friendly Andamanese in different places, in which two
of the friendly Andamanese men and one girl were killed and three men
and one boy were wounded. There were also one or two casual meetings
between Jarawa and friendly Andamanese. One of the friendlies was
surprised and killed while turtle hunting in 1894. During the same
years the Jarawa made on different occasions about twenty attacks on
parties of convicts or on separate individuals, killing altogether 27
convicts and two police constables, and wounding six other convicts. In
these skirmishes and in the expeditions to which they gave rise three
Jarawa were killed and seven wounded on various occasions, and several
times Jarawa men, women or children were captured and afterwards
released. A number of convicts have at different times run away from
the Settlement and as some of those were never after heard of they may
be supposed to have been killed by the Jarawa. For an official record
of dealings with the Jarawa see the “Census Report” 1901, pp. 68–90.

[53] I could not obtain any definite legend about these stones, but one
informant said that when Biliku got angry and destroyed the world (see
later, Chap. IV) the children all became stones at this place.

[54] This is the plant (not identified) of which the leaves were, till
recent times, worn by the women of the North Andaman to cover the
pudenda. In the South Andaman the leaves of the Mimusops littoralis are
in use for this purpose, and the Northern tribes have recently given up
their own custom and adopted that of the South.

[55] Unfortunately I was not able to see this ceremony performed, and
my information is therefore derived from the statements of the natives.

[56] There is no secrecy about any of the proceedings; the whole
ceremony is performed in the village and may be witnessed by anybody.

[57] In the Southern tribes large stones are placed on the youth’s
thighs.

[58] In these days the natives are very fond of tea, which they obtain
from the Andamanese Homes; during the ceremony described above the
youth or girl is not permitted to drink tea.

[59] I believe that the dance is intended to imitate the movement of a
turtle as it swims through the water.

[60] The meaning of the word kimil (or gumul) will be discussed in a
later chapter.

[61] This plant is selected because it is associated with
honey-gathering; its bitter sap, being extremely obnoxious to bees, is
smeared over their persons when taking a comb, and enables them to
escape scot free with their prize. (Note by Mr Man.)

[62] This is believed to be the Ophiophagus elaps. (Note by Mr Man.)

[63] Man, op. cit. p. 133.

[64] Man, loc. cit. p. 143.

[65] Man, op. cit. p. 354. Mr Man adds in a note that “it is believed
that Puluga would punish severely any person who might be guilty of
eating his yat-tub, either by causing his skin to peel off (wainyake)
or by turning his hair white and flaying him alive.” On Puluga see
later, Chaps. III and IV.

[66] Turtle are captured alive by means of harpoons, and may be kept
alive several days before they are killed and eaten.

[67] Mr M. V. Portman gives a list of personal names in use in the
South Andaman in his Notes on the Languages of the South Andaman Group
of Tribes, p. 70. The derivations of many of the names as there given,
are, however, of doubtful accuracy.

[68] Portman, Notes on the Languages of the South Andaman Group of
Tribes, pp. 166–188.

[69] A similar custom is found in many savage tribes. Thus in many
parts of Australia the aborigines call white men by the same name that
they apply to the spirits of the dead.

[70] Man, op. cit. pp. 158, 159.

[71] Portman, Notes on the Languages, etc. p. 183.

[72] Man, op. cit. p. 152.

[73] Ibid. p. 160.

[74] Man, op. cit. p. 160.

[75] Ibid. p. 161.

[76] Portman, Notes on the Languages of the South Andaman, p. 328.

[77] Portman, Notes on the Languages of the South Andaman, p. 314.

[78] Man, op. cit. pp. 153, 154.

[79] Man, op. cit. p. 165.

[80] Ibid. p. 153.

[81] Man, op. cit. p. 157.

[82] Man, op. cit. p. 112.

[83] Man, op. cit. p. 159.

[84] Ibid. p. 158.

[85] Man, op. cit. p. 153.

[86] Man, op. cit. p. 159.

[87] Man, op. cit. p. 161.

[88] I could not obtain any information about the word that Mr Man
gives as chaitan. Some men of the South Andaman whom I questioned did
not seem to recognize the word, except as their way of pronouncing the
Urdu word shaitan = devil.

[89] In the “Census Report” 1901, p. 62, Sir Richard Temple writes,
“The Andamanese have an idea that the ‘soul’ will go under the earth by
an aerial bridge after death, but there is no heaven nor hell nor any
idea of a corporeal resurrection in a religious sense.”

[90] It may be noted that in the Andamanese languages there is no
future tense of the verb, and it is often very difficult to know
whether a speaker is referring to the present or to the future.
Further, although there is a past tense, a native often uses the
present tense in a narrative relating to the past, so that a statement
relating to the past and one relating to the future may have exactly
the same grammatical form. Mr Ellis, writing in the Journal of the
Philological Society (1882) from information supplied by Mr Man, gives
a verbal suffix -ngabo denoting the future in the Aka-Bea language. Mr
Portman points out that this is an error. (Notes on the Languages of
the South Andaman, p. 88.)

[91] Man, op. cit. p. 96.

[92] Man, op. cit. p. 83.

[93] In preparing the fibre, the skin or bark of the young shoots of
the plant is torn off in strips and these are placed on the thigh and
scraped with a Cyrena shell.

[94] Man, op. cit. pp. 153 and 172.

[95] Portman, Notes on the Languages, etc. p. 97.

[96] The legend will be given later.

[97] Man, op. cit. p. 169.

[98] The suffix -la is added to personal names and to terms of address
in order to express respect.

[99] The name seems to mean “alone.”

[100] The giant bamboo does not grow in the Andamans, but pieces of it
are often drifted ashore, having come from the coast of Burma. The
natives pick up these drift-wood bamboos and make buckets of them. It
is possible that the bamboo from which the first man was born was just
such a piece drifted up from the sea. Unfortunately I neglected to
enquire on this point when taking down the legend.

[101] The meaning of the name is “the cave of Tarai”; I believe that
this is the name of a spot in the Aka-J̌eru country.

[102] The meaning of the name was not discovered.

[103] The lizard was caught in some way by his genital organs, but I
was unable to understand the story completely.

[104] This is the small platform of sticks placed near or above the
fire, on which the natives keep their food, and on which they often
place objects that they desire to dry.

[105] Notes on the Languages, etc. p. 227.

[106] When an old man of the A-Pučikwar tribe was giving me the
information repeated above, an Andamanese man was with us who had been
brought up as a Christian and had some knowledge of the doctrines of
that faith. He explained to me that Tomo is the equivalent of the
Christian God. This man belonged to the Akar-Bale tribe.

[107] These names are common personal names among the aborigines of the
present day. Mr Portman derives Nyali from nam-da, the name of a tree,
and Irap from pira-da meaning “scattered,” but these derivations are
far from being authenticated. (Portman, Notes on the Languages of the
South Andaman Group of Tribes, p. 70.)

[108] The place called Irap is at the north end of Havelock Island.

[109] Man, op. cit. p. 164.

[110] Until the settlement of Europeans on the islands the Andamanese
had no knowledge of any means of producing fire. It is necessary to
remember this to understand some of their legends which relate how in
the time of the ancestors the fire was very nearly lost in a heavy
storm.

[111] I understood that Lirtit, by the loss of his wings and tail,
became a man.

[112] Portman, loc. cit.

[113] Mo̱m is a title indicating respect, and Mirit is the imperial
pigeon.

[114] Portman, loc. cit.

[115] Ibid.

[116] Portman, loc. cit.

[117] Man, op. cit. p. 164.

[118] Ibid.

[119] Man, op. cit. p. 167.

[120] Dik was one of the ancestors. He was a giant and was so big that
he could go into the deepest water and never needed a canoe. He used to
shoot dugong and porpoise with his bow and arrow. (The natives shoot
small fish with a bow and arrows, but large fish and dugong and
porpoise they take with harpoons.)

[121] Karami is the name of a bird that was not identified.

[122] Kočurag-boa is the Akar-Bale name for a huge legendary animal.

[123] When a man has killed another, either in a personal or a tribal
quarrel, he has to observe several customs of which one is to keep
himself painted with red paint for several weeks.

[124] Man, op. cit. p. 171.

[125] Man, op. cit. pp. 167–169.

[126] Notes on the Languages, etc. p. 27.

[127] Man, op. cit. p. 166.

[128] Ibid.

[129] Man, op. cit. p. 169.

[130] This is the name of some creature that I did not identify,
perhaps a kind of spider.

[131] An Andaman Islander will often, when walking along the shore,
shoot his arrows before him, either aiming at some object, or trying to
send each one as far as possible. I have never seen them do this in the
jungle, for they might easily lose the arrows.

[132] The Andamanese classify resin as a “stone” although they know its
vegetable origin.

[133] Man, op. cit. p. 172.

[134] Kalwadi is a small crab, yaramurud is the crow pheasant
(Centropus andamanensis), and toau is the hawksbill turtle.

[135] Knives are generally carried slipped into a string that is tied
round the neck, the knife, with a skewer of sharpened wood that is
attached to it, hanging at the back of the neck, where it is easily
accessible and not likely to get lost.

[136] I could obtain no explanation of the phrase, or word, to̱ kit. My
informant only said “That is the way the spirits talk.”

[137] Man, op. cit. p. 165.

[138] The sneezing (the word is translated literally) is a sort of
whistling noise that the wild pigs make when they suspect danger.

[139] The Andamanese always disembowel a pig and sever the joints of
its legs before they place it on a fire.

[140] Man, op. cit. p. 170.

[141] Page 214.

[142] Man, op. cit. p. 170.

[143] In taking a honeycomb the natives often drive away the bees with
fire or smoke.

[144] In climbing a tall tree the Andamanese choose a stout cane or
other creeper depending from one of the branches of the tree, and climb
up it.

[145] The natives express their joy at a success in hunting by
shouting.

[146] Man, op. cit. p. 173.

[147] The narrator said “resin.” The Dipterocarpus tree does not
produce resin, but a sort of oil. The marks on the two fishes owe their
origin to this incident.

[148] Man, op. cit. p. 173.

[149] Man, op. cit. p. 169.

[150] Vide supra, p. 142.

[151] The making of such hypothetical reconstructions of the past has
been regarded by a number of writers as the principal if not the sole
task of ethnology. My own view is that such studies can never be of any
great scientific value. Although, within narrow limits, particularly
when the method is applied to the facts of language and material
culture, it is possible to reach conclusions of some degree of
probability, yet by their very nature all such hypotheses are incapable
of verification. Moreover, the purpose of scientific studies is to
discover general laws, and hypotheses as to events in the past of which
we have and can have no certain knowledge will not provide suitable
material from which to draw generalisations.

[152] It may be worth while to mention that the interpretation of
Andamanese customs given in this chapter was not worked out until after
I had left the islands. Had it been otherwise I should have made
careful enquiries into subjects which, as it was, escaped my notice.

[153] Tylor, Primitive Culture, I, 387.

[154] Frazer, Totemism and Exogamy, IV.

[155] Max Müller, Physical Religion, p. 119.

[156] Marett, Threshold of Religion.

[157] McDougall, Introduction to Social Psychology, Chap. XIII, seems
to combine the two hypotheses.

[158] For a criticism of the hypotheses of animism and naturism as
explanations of primitive religion see Durkheim, Les Formes
Élémentaires de la Vie Religieuse, Book I, chapters 2 and 3.

[159] Sentiment,—an organised system of emotional tendencies centred
about some object.

[160] See p. 73 above.

[161] Page 134.

[162] In a few words the psycho-physical theory here assumed is that
weeping is a substitute for motor activity when the kinetic system of
the body (motor centres, thyroid, suprarenals, etc.) is stimulated but
no effective action in direct response to the stimulus is possible at
the moment. When a sentiment is stimulated and action to which it might
lead is frustrated, the resultant emotional state is usually painful,
and hence weeping is commonly associated with painful states.

[163] McDougall, Social Psychology.

[164] Active sympathy, the habitual sharing of joyful and painful
emotions, is of the utmost importance in the formation of sentiments of
personal attachment.

[165] It is a commonplace of psychology that a collective emotion, i.e.
one felt and expressed at the same moment by a number of persons, is
felt much more intensely than an unshared emotion of the same kind.

[166] It will be shown later in the chapter that when individuals are
excluded from participation in the dance it is because they are in a
condition of partial exclusion from the common life.

[167] The psychology of dancing offers a wide field for study that has
as yet, so far as I know, been barely touched. The following brief
notes are therefore necessarily incomplete and somewhat unsatisfactory.

[168] I have known a dance to be continued for seven or eight hours,
each dancer taking only short periods of rest; and it must be
remembered that the Andamanese dance is more strenuous than our
ball-room dances.

[169] Man, op. cit. p. 76.

[170] Man, op. cit. p. 333.

[171] In a number of tribes of Western Australia I found an exactly
similar custom. It was formerly the rule that after the death of a near
relative the mourner must abstain from eating kangaroo, that being the
largest game animal. Since the establishment of sheep stations in their
country, with the consequent great decrease in numbers of the kangaroo,
it has come about that the animal which now provides their most
important supply of meat is the sheep, and the modern rule is that a
mourner must not eat mutton.

[172] Page 171.

[173] The brakes formed by the cane (bido) from the leaves of which the
ko̱ro fibre is obtained seem to be regarded as lurking places of the
spirits. The natives often speak of the Bido-teč-lau (Calamus leaf
spirits).

[174] Page 216.

[175] The psychological function of individual anger is to restore to
their normal condition the wounded self-regarding sentiments. The
function of collective anger is similarly to restore the collective
sentiments on which the solidarity of the society depends.

[176] I once drew a few grotesque figures for the amusement of some
Andamanese children, and they at once pronounced them to be “spirits.”

[177] The Andamanese beliefs about storms and the weather generally
will be dealt with in the next chapter.

[178] See above, p. 119.

[179] See p. 227.

[180] I am unfortunately obliged to leave a big gap in this chapter and
in the book, owing to my inability to discuss the Andamanese notions
about sex. The natives of the Great Andaman at the present time show an
unusual prudery in their conversation and dealings with white men, but
there is good reason to suspect that this is due to the influence of
officers who have been in charge of the Andaman Home in former years.
At the present time all the men except a few of the oldest in remote
parts are very careful never to appear before a white man without some
covering although formerly they wore nothing. In their conversation in
the presence of a white man they are careful to avoid reference to
sexual matters. The men of the Little Andaman who have not come under
the influence of the Andamanese Homes, still go naked and unashamed,
and indulge in obscene gestures and jokes. At the time I was in the
Andamans I failed to realise the very great importance of a thorough
knowledge of the notions of a primitive people on matters of sex in any
attempt to understand their customs, and therefore failed to make the
necessary enquiries.

[181] In order to carry the analysis further it would be necessary to
consider in detail the whole question of the relation of art and
ceremonial, and that of the social function of art which is involved in
it, and also to deal with the notion of “value” as it appears in
primitive societies. The material from the Andaman Islands is not
suitable for the discussion of these problems.

[182] The exposition of this important thesis can only be given here in
the most abbreviated form. The thesis itself, as applied to primitive
ritual in general, owes its origin to Professor Émile Durkheim, and has
been expounded by him (more particularly in his work Les Formes
élémentaires de la Vie religieuse) and by Messieurs H. Hubert and M.
Mauss.

[183] Primus in orbe deos fecit timor.

[184] Page 214.

[185] We have seen, in the last chapter, that any condition of the
individual in which he is withdrawn from active participation in the
common life is regarded as one of danger from magico-religious forces
antagonistic to the society.

[186] It will be shown later in the chapter that some part of the
respect paid to the cicada is due to its connection not with the day
and night but with the seasons of the year.

[187] Page 215.

[188] Page 221.

[189] Page 294.

[190] Page 215.

[191] Page 213.

[192] Pages 207 and 204.

[193] Page 207.

[194] Ibid.

[195] Page 204.

[196] Page 203.

[197] Page 207.

[198] Page 202.

[199] Page 206.

[200] Ibid.

[201] Page 207.

[202] Page 208.

[203] The same threefold division of the world is seen in the beliefs
about the three kinds of spirits, those of the forest, those of the
sea, and the Morua who, while spoken of as spirits of the sky, are
often thought of as living in the tops of the tall trees.

[204] Page 218.

[205] It is worth while to recall here the belief that if a man goes
into the water after eating civet-cat he will not be able to swim.

[206] Page 208.

[207] Ibid.

[208] Page 209.

[209] Page 206.

[210] Page 207.

[211] It appears also in geographical names. Puluga-l’ar-mugu, meaning
‘the Puluga front’ is the name of a part of the Archipelago facing the
N.E. and means ‘the side facing Puluga.’

[212] Although it is generally believed that storms (or more exactly,
violent storms or cyclones) are the results of the anger of Biliku, yet
there is a conflicting belief that storms are made by the spirits,
particularly the spirits of the sea.

[213] Page 154.

[214] The application of the name biliku to the spider is clearly a
minor motive, and probably a late accretion. The name of the N.E.
monsoon is the same in all the divisions of the Andamans about which we
have information, with dialectic differences only. In the Little
Andaman the form of the name is Öluga, and the same name is given to
the monitor lizard. Presumably, therefore, there was originally one
name throughout the Andamans for the N.E. monsoon (Öluga, Puluga,
Bilik, Bilika, Biliku) and later this name was applied to the spider in
the North Andaman and to the monitor lizard in the Little Andaman. It
may be noted that the name of the monitor lizard varies from one
language to another in the Great Andaman.

[215] It is to be noted that these tabus connected with Biliku are not
absolute prohibitions; they are beliefs that if certain things are done
Biliku will be angry (i.e., there may be storms); if you do these
things you must risk the danger. It is exactly the same with the
roasting of pork.

[216] See, for instance, the Aka-J̌eru legend on pages 197–198, the
Aka-Kede on page 200 and that from the Akar-Bale tribe on pages
200–201, and also the legends on pages 207, 208.

[217] In a paper in Folk-lore, vol. xx, 1909, I put forward the
hypothesis that probably at one time all the tribes of the Andamans
regarded Biliku (Puluga) as female, and Tarai (Daria) as male. I am
still inclined to think that there is some evidence for this, but a
discussion of what the Andamanese beliefs may have been in the past is
entirely outside the scope of this chapter and is therefore omitted.

[218] The stem be seems to be connected with the idea of cutting.

[219] In dealing with the account given by Mr Man of the Andaman
mythology it is necessary to remember that he was undoubtedly
influenced by a very strong desire to show that the beliefs of the
Andamanese about Puluga were really fundamentally the same as the
beliefs of the Christian about his God. It may be taken as certain that
he did not consciously allow this wish to affect his record of the
Andaman beliefs, but it is very improbable that it did not
unconsciously have a great deal of influence both on Mr Man and on his
informants.

[220] To complete the discussion of this part of the subject it would
be necessary to deal with many points in the legends of the real
meaning of which I do not feel satisfied. I have, for instance, given
no explanation of the position of Pe̱rǰido in the Biliku-Tarai myth,
although this is probably an important matter. Nor have I traced to its
source the connection of Biliku (with her net, and her hole, or cave,
in which she shuts herself up to sleep and from which she comes out to
bring rain and storm) with the spider. Besides Tomo, Biliku has yet
another competitor for the position of control over the fine weather of
the hot season, namely the snake, or-čubi (wara-ǰobo), which is
regarded as being in some way the guardian of honey and of fine
weather. There are legends that show the connection of this snake with
honey (page 227) and the same connection is shown in the honey-eating
ceremony (page 105). According to Mr Man, when the natives of the South
Andaman see a dark cloud approaching and they do not wish it to rain
they threaten Puluga that they will call up the wara-ǰobo to bite him.
The snake, like other snakes, is only to be seen during the hot weather
of the honey season. It may be remembered that it is from this snake
that the pattern used in decorating the body with white clay is named.

[221] In the last chapter it was shown that the attribution of magical
force to such things as foods and human bones is simply the means by
which the social values of these things are represented and recognized.
Similarly here the magical powers of the ancestors are simply the
representation of their social value, i.e. of the social value of
tradition.

[222] In Central Australia it is believed that if a boy who has not
been initiated eats large lizards he will develop an abnormal and
diseased craving for sexual intercourse. (Spencer and Gillen, Native
Tribes of Central Australia, p. 471.) A friend who has observed the
monitor lizard in Australia tells me that the animal fully deserves its
reputation.

[223] Page 217.

[224] Page 218.

[225] Page 218.

[226] See Introduction, p. 12.

[227] The information here given as to the Semang is derived from two
works, Skeat and Blagden, Pagan Races of the Malay Peninsula, vol. 1,
quoted as Skeat, and Rudolf Martin, Die Inlandstämme der Malayischen
Halbinsel, 1905, quoted as Martin.

[228] The information about the Philippine Negritos is derived from
Reed, Negritos of Zambales, Manila, 1904, quoted as Reed, and A. B.
Meyer, Die Philippinen, II, Die Negritos, Dresden, 1893, quoted as
Meyer.

[229] See p. 34.

[230] See Census Report, 1901.

[231] Supplement to the Andaman and Nicobar Gazette, January 2, 1904.

[232] Skeat, p. 172.

[233] Skeat, p. 174.

[234] Skeat, p. 176, and plate. See also Annandale, Fasciculi
Malayensis, Anthropology, Part I, Plate IV.

[235] Skeat, p. 174.

[236] Skeat, p. 177.

[237] Reed, Plate xxxviii.

[238] Meyer, Plate x.

[239] Skeat, p. 341.

[240] Skeat, p. 270.

[241] Skeat, p. 280.

[242] Skeat, p. 205.

[243] Skeat, p. 205.

[244] Reed, p. 44.

[245] Reed, p. 44.

[246] Reed, p. 47.

[247] Reed, p. 47.

[248] Reed, p. 48.

[249] For information about the two specimens at Cambridge I am
indebted to the kindness of Mr J. W. Layard.

[250] According to Skeat the end with the longer point is the lower end
of the bow (Skeat, p. 273), but Martin (p. 785) describes a bow of this
type and states that the longer point is the upper end.

[251] Meyer, pp. 13–17 and Plates VI–VIII.

[252] Meyer, Plates VI and VIII.

[253] Skeat, p. 274.

[254] Lapicque, “Ethnographie des Iles Andaman,” Bulletin de la Société
d’Anthropologie de Paris, 1894, p. 370.

[255] Skeat, p. 383.

[256] Man, op. cit. p. 77.

[257] Man, Journ. Anthr. Inst. XII, p. 367, note 4.

[258] Man, op. cit. p. 397.

[259] Supplement to the Andaman and Nicobar Gazette, January 2, 1904.

[260] Published in Vol. ii of the journal Anthropos, 1907.

[261] Although I had acquired some knowledge of phonetics before I went
to the Andamans, as a necessary part of the preliminary training of an
ethnologist, yet it was not really sufficient to enable me to deal in a
thoroughly scientific manner with the problems of Andamanese phonetics,
and my further studies of the subject give me reason to believe that my
phonetic analysis of the Andaman languages was not as thorough as it
might have been.